, come, good Warwick, go with me;
    I have great matters to impart to thee.
                                Exeunt all but QUEEN and SUFFOLK
  QUEEN. Mischance and sorrow go along with you!
    Heart's discontent and sour affliction
    Be playfellows to keep you company!
    There's two of you; the devil make a third,
    And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!  
  SUFFOLK. Cease, gentle Queen, these execrations,
    And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.
  QUEEN. Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch,
    Has thou not spirit to curse thine enemy?
  SUFFOLK. A plague upon them! Wherefore should I curse them?
    Would curses kill as doth the mandrake's groan,
    I would invent as bitter searching terms,
    As curst, as harsh, and horrible to hear,
    Deliver'd strongly through my fixed teeth,
    With full as many signs of deadly hate,
    As lean-fac'd Envy in her loathsome cave.
    My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words,
    Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint,
    Mine hair be fix'd an end, as one distract;
    Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban;
    And even now my burden'd heart would break,
    Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!
    Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste!
    Their sweetest shade a grove of cypress trees!
    Their chiefest prospect murd'ring basilisks!  
    Their softest touch as smart as lizards' stings!
    Their music frightful as the serpent's hiss,
    And boding screech-owls make the consort full!
    all the foul terrors in dark-seated hell-
  QUEEN. Enough, sweet Suffolk, thou torment'st thyself;
    And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass,
    Or like an overcharged gun, recoil,
    And turns the force of them upon thyself.
  SUFFOLK. You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?
    Now, by the ground that I am banish'd from,
    Well could I curse away a winter's night,
    Though standing naked on a mountain top
    Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
    And think it but a minute spent in sport.
  QUEEN. O, let me entreat thee cease! Give me thy hand,
    That I may dew it with my mournful tears;
    Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place
    To wash away my woeful monuments.
    O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
    That thou might'st think upon these by the seal,  
    Through whom a thousand sighs are breath'd for thee!
    So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief;
    'Tis but surmis'd whiles thou art standing by,
    As one that surfeits thinking on a want.
    I will repeal thee or, be well assur'd,
    Adventure to be banished myself;
    And banished I am, if but from thee.
    Go, speak not to me; even now be gone.
    O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemn'd
    Embrace, and kiss, and take ten thousand leaves,
    Loather a hundred times to part than die.
    Yet now, farewell; and farewell life with thee!
  SUFFOLK. Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,
    Once by the King and three times thrice by thee,
    'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence;
    A wilderness is populous enough,
    So Suffolk had thy heavenly company;
    For where thou art, there is the world itself,
    With every several pleasure in the world;
    And where thou art not, desolation.  
    I can no more: Live thou to joy thy life;
    Myself no joy in nought but that thou liv'st.

                           Enter VAUX

  QUEEN. Whither goes Vaux so fast? What news, I prithee?
  VAUX. To signify unto his Majesty
    That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death;
    For suddenly a grievous sickness took him
    That makes him gasp, and stare, and catch the air,
    Blaspheming God, and cursing men on earth.
    Sometime he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghost
    Were by his side; sometime he calls the King
    And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
    The secrets of his overcharged soul;
    And I am sent to tell his Majesty
    That even now he cries aloud for him.
  QUEEN. Go tell this heavy message to the King.       Exit VAUX
    Ay me! What is this world! What news are these!
    But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss,  
    Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure?
    Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
    And with the southern clouds contend in tears-
    Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows?
    Now get thee hence: the King, thou know'st, is coming;
    If thou be found by me; thou art but dead.
  SUFFOLK. If I depart from thee I cannot live;
    And in thy sight to die, what were it else
    But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
    Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
    As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe
    Dying with mother's dug between its lips;
    Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad
    And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
    To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth;
    So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
    Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
    And then it liv'd in sweet Elysium.
    To die by thee were but to die in jest:
    From thee to die were torture more than death.  
    O, let me stay, befall what may befall!
  QUEEN. Away! Though parting be a fretful corrosive,
    It is applied to a deathful wound.
    To France, sweet Suffolk. Let me hear from thee;
    For whereso'er thou art in this world's globe
    I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.
  SUFFOLK. I go.
  QUEEN. And take my heart with thee.           [She kisses him]
  SUFFOLK. A jewel, lock'd into the woefull'st cask
    That ever did contain a thing of worth.
    Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we:
    This way fall I to death.
  QUEEN. This way for me.                       Exeunt severally




SCENE III.
London. CARDINAL BEAUFORT'S bedchamber

Enter the KING, SALISBURY, and WARWICK, to the CARDINAL in bed

  KING HENRY. How fares my lord? Speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign.
  CARDINAL. If thou be'st Death I'll give thee England's treasure,
    Enough to purchase such another island,
    So thou wilt let me live and feel no pain.
  KING HENRY. Ah, what a sign it is of evil life
    Where death's approach is seen so terrible!
  WARWICK. Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.
  CARDINAL. Bring me unto my trial when you will.
    Died he not in his bed? Where should he die?
    Can I make men live, whe'er they will or no?
    O, torture me no more! I will confess.
    Alive again? Then show me where he is;
    I'll give a thousand pound to look upon him.
    He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.
    Comb down his hair; look, look! it stands upright,
    Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul!
    Give me some drink; and bid the apothecary  
    Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.
  KING HENRY. O Thou eternal Mover of the heavens,
    Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
    O, beat away the busy meddling fiend
    That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul,
    And from his bosom purge this black despair!
  WARWICK. See how the pangs of death do make him grin
  SALISBURY. Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.
  KING HENRY. Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!
    Lord Card'nal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss,
    Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.
    He dies, and makes no sign: O God, forgive him!
  WARWICK. So bad a death argues a monstrous life.
  KING HENRY. Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
    Close up his eyes, and draw the curtain close;
    And let us all to meditation.                         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
The coast of Kent

Alarum.  Fight at sea.  Ordnance goes off.  Enter a LIEUTENANT,
a SHIPMASTER and his MATE, and WALTER WHITMORE, with sailors;
SUFFOLK and other GENTLEMEN, as prisoners

  LIEUTENANT. The gaudy, blabbing, and remorseful day
    Is crept into the bosom of the sea;
    And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades
    That drag the tragic melancholy night;
    Who with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
    Clip dead men's graves, and from their misty jaws
    Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air.
    Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize;
    For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
    Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
    Or with their blood stain this discoloured shore.
    Master, this prisoner freely give I thee;
    And thou that art his mate make boot of this;
    The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.  
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. What is my ransom, master, let me know?
  MASTER. A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head.
  MATE. And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.
  LIEUTENANT. What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,
    And bear the name and port of gentlemen?
    Cut both the villains' throats- for die you shall;
    The lives of those which we have lost in fight
    Be counterpois'd with such a petty sum!
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I'll give it, sir: and therefore spare my life.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. And so will I, and write home for it straight.
  WHITMORE. I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
    [To SUFFOLK] And therefore, to revenge it, shalt thou die;
    And so should these, if I might have my will.
  LIEUTENANT. Be not so rash; take ransom, let him live.
  SUFFOLK. Look on my George, I am a gentleman:
    Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.
  WHITMORE. And so am I: my name is Walter Whitmore.
    How now! Why start'st thou? What, doth death affright?
  SUFFOLK. Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.
    A cunning man did calculate my birth  
    And told me that by water I should die;
    Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded;
    Thy name is Gualtier, being rightly sounded.
  WHITMORE. Gualtier or Walter, which it is I care not:
    Never yet did base dishonour blur our name
    But with our sword we wip'd away the blot;
    Therefore, when merchant-like I sell revenge,
    Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defac'd,
    And I proclaim'd a coward through the world.
  SUFFOLK. Stay, Whitmore, for thy prisoner is a prince,
    The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.
  WHITMORE. The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags?
  SUFFOLK. Ay, but these rags are no part of the Duke:
    Jove sometime went disguis'd, and why not I?
  LIEUTENANT. But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.
  SUFFOLK. Obscure and lowly swain, King Henry's blood,
    The honourable blood of Lancaster,
    Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.
    Hast thou not kiss'd thy hand and held my stirrup,
    Bareheaded plodded by my foot-cloth mule,  
    And thought thee happy when I shook my head?
    How often hast thou waited at my cup,
    Fed from my trencher, kneel'd down at the board,
    When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
    Remember it, and let it make thee crestfall'n,
    Ay, and allay thus thy abortive pride,
    How in our voiding-lobby hast thou stood
    And duly waited for my coming forth.
    This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,
    And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.
  WHITMORE. Speak, Captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?
  LIEUTENANT. First let my words stab him, as he hath me.
  SUFFOLK. Base slave, thy words are blunt, and so art thou.
  LIEUTENANT. Convey him hence, and on our longboat's side
    Strike off his head.
  SUFFOLK. Thou dar'st not, for thy own.
  LIEUTENANT. Poole!
  SUFFOLK. Poole?
  LIEUTENANT. Ay, kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt
    Troubles the silver spring where England drinks;  
    Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth
    For swallowing the treasure of the realm.
    Thy lips, that kiss'd the Queen, shall sweep the ground;
    And thou that smil'dst at good Duke Humphrey's death
    Against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain,
    Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again;
    And wedded be thou to the hags of hell
    For daring to affy a mighty lord
    Unto the daughter of a worthless king,
    Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem.
    By devilish policy art thou grown great,
    And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorg'd
    With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart.
    By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France;
    The false revolting Normans thorough thee
    Disdain to call us lord; and Picardy
    Hath slain their governors, surpris'd our forts,
    And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.
    The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all,
    Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,  
    As hating thee, are rising up in arms;
    And now the house of York- thrust from the crown
    By shameful murder of a guiltless king
    And lofty proud encroaching tyranny-
    Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colours
    Advance our half-fac'd sun, striving to shine,
    Under the which is writ 'Invitis nubibus.'
    The commons here in Kent are up in arms;
    And to conclude, reproach and beggary
    Is crept into the palace of our King,
    And all by thee. Away! convey him hence.
  SUFFOLK. O that I were a god, to shoot forth thunder
    Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
    Small things make base men proud: this villain here,
    Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more
    Than Bargulus, the strong Illyrian pirate.
    Drones suck not eagles' blood but rob beehives.
    It is impossible that I should die
    By such a lowly vassal as thyself.
    Thy words move rage and not remorse in me.  
    I go of message from the Queen to France:
    I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.
  LIEUTENANT. Walter-
  WHITMORE. Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.
  SUFFOLK. Gelidus timor occupat artus: it is thee I fear.
  WHITMORE. Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
    What, are ye daunted now? Now will ye stoop?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.
  SUFFOLK. Suffolk's imperial tongue is stem and rough,
    Us'd to command, untaught to plead for favour.
    Far be it we should honour such as these
    With humble suit: no, rather let my head
    Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any
    Save to the God of heaven and to my king;
    And sooner dance upon a bloody pole
    Than stand uncover'd to the vulgar groom.
    True nobility is exempt from fear:
    More can I bear than you dare execute.
  LIEUTENANT. Hale him away, and let him talk no more.
  SUFFOLK. Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can,  
    That this my death may never be forgot-
    Great men oft die by vile bezonians:
    A Roman sworder and banditto slave
    Murder'd sweet Tully; Brutus' bastard hand
    Stabb'd Julius Caesar; savage islanders
    Pompey the Great; and Suffolk dies by pirates.
                                        Exit WALTER with SUFFOLK
  LIEUTENANT. And as for these, whose ransom we have set,
    It is our pleasure one of them depart;
    Therefore come you with us, and let him go.
                              Exeunt all but the FIRST GENTLEMAN

                Re-enter WHITMORE with SUFFOLK'S body

  WHITMORE. There let his head and lifeless body lie,
    Until the Queen his mistress bury it.                   Exit
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. O barbarous and bloody spectacle!
    His body will I bear unto the King.
    If he revenge it not, yet will his friends;
    So will the Queen, that living held him dear.  
                                              Exit with the body




SCENE II.
Blackheath

Enter GEORGE BEVIS and JOHN HOLLAND

  GEORGE. Come and get thee a sword, though made of a lath; they have
    been up these two days.
  JOHN. They have the more need to sleep now, then.
  GEORGE. I tell thee Jack Cade the clothier means to dress the
    commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.
  JOHN. So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I say it was never
    merry world in England since gentlemen came up.
  GEORGE. O miserable age! Virtue is not regarded in handicraftsmen.
  JOHN. The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.
  GEORGE. Nay, more, the King's Council are no good workmen.
  JOHN. True; and yet it is said 'Labour in thy vocation'; which is
    as much to say as 'Let the magistrates be labouring men'; and
    therefore should we be magistrates.
  GEORGE. Thou hast hit it; for there's no better sign of a brave
    mind than a hard hand.
  JOHN. I see them! I see them! There's Best's son, the tanner of
    Wingham-  
  GEORGE. He shall have the skins of our enemies to make dog's
    leather of.
  JOHN. And Dick the butcher-
  GEORGE. Then is sin struck down, like an ox, and iniquity's throat
    cut like a calf.
  JOHN. And Smith the weaver-
  GEORGE. Argo, their thread of life is spun.
  JOHN. Come, come, let's fall in with them.

                Drum. Enter CADE, DICK THE BUTCHER, SMITH
             THE WEAVER, and a SAWYER, with infinite numbers

  CADE. We John Cade, so term'd of our supposed father-
  DICK. [Aside] Or rather, of stealing a cade of herrings.
  CADE. For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with the
    spirit of putting down kings and princes- command silence.
  DICK. Silence!
  CADE. My father was a Mortimer-
  DICK. [Aside] He was an honest man and a good bricklayer.
  CADE. My mother a Plantagenet-  
  DICK. [Aside] I knew her well; she was a midwife.
  CADE. My wife descended of the Lacies-
  DICK. [Aside] She was, indeed, a pedlar's daughter, and sold many
    laces.
  SMITH. [Aside] But now of late, not able to travel with her furr'd
    pack, she washes bucks here at home.
  CADE. Therefore am I of an honourable house.
  DICK. [Aside] Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable, and there
    was he born, under a hedge, for his father had never a house but
    the cage.
  CADE. Valiant I am.
  SMITH. [Aside] 'A must needs; for beggary is valiant.
  CADE. I am able to endure much.
  DICK. [Aside] No question of that; for I have seen him whipt three
    market days together.
  CADE. I fear neither sword nor fire.
  SMITH. [Aside] He need not fear the sword, for his coat is of
    proof.
  DICK. [Aside] But methinks he should stand in fear of fire, being
    burnt i' th' hand for stealing of sheep.  
  CADE. Be brave, then, for your captain is brave, and vows
    reformation. There shall be in England seven halfpenny loaves
    sold for a penny; the three-hoop'd pot shall have ten hoops; and
    I will make it felony to drink small beer. All the realm shall be
    in common, and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to grass. And
    when I am king- as king I will be
  ALL. God save your Majesty!
  CADE. I thank you, good people- there shall be no money; all shall
    eat and drink on my score, and I will apparel them all in one
    livery, that they may agree like brothers and worship me their
    lord.
  DICK. The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.
  CADE. Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable thing, that
    of the skin of an innocent lamb should be made parchment? That
    parchment, being scribbl'd o'er, should undo a man? Some say the
    bee stings; but I say 'tis the bee's wax; for I did but seal once
    to a thing, and I was never mine own man since. How now! Who's
    there?

              Enter some, bringing in the CLERK OF CHATHAM  

  SMITH. The clerk of Chatham. He can write and read and cast
    accompt.
  CADE. O monstrous!
  SMITH. We took him setting of boys' copies.
  CADE. Here's a villain!
  SMITH. Has a book in his pocket with red letters in't.
  CADE. Nay, then he is a conjurer.
  DICK. Nay, he can make obligations and write court-hand.
  CADE. I am sorry for't; the man is a proper man, of mine honour;
    unless I find him guilty, he shall not die. Come hither, sirrah,
    I must examine thee. What is thy name?
  CLERK. Emmanuel.
  DICK. They use to write it on the top of letters; 'twill go hard
    with you.
  CADE. Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name, or hast thou a
    mark to thyself, like a honest plain-dealing man?
  CLERK. Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought up that I can
    write my name.
  ALL. He hath confess'd. Away with him! He's a villain and a  
    traitor.
  CADE. Away with him, I say! Hang him with his pen and inkhorn about
    his neck.                            Exit one with the CLERK

                           Enter MICHAEL

  MICHAEL. Where's our General?
  CADE. Here I am, thou particular fellow.
  MICHAEL. Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother are
    hard by, with the King's forces.
  CADE. Stand, villain, stand, or I'll fell thee down. He shall be
    encount'red with a man as good as himself. He is but a knight,
    is 'a?
  MICHAEL. No.
  CADE. To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.
    [Kneels] Rise up, Sir John Mortimer. [Rises] Now have at him!

                Enter SIR HUMPHREY STAFFORD and WILLIAM
                  his brother, with drum and soldiers
  
  STAFFORD. Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
    Mark'd for the gallows, lay your weapons down;
    Home to your cottages, forsake this groom;
    The King is merciful if you revolt.
  WILLIAM STAFFORD. But angry, wrathful, and inclin'd to blood,
    If you go forward; therefore yield or die.
  CADE. As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not;
    It is to you, good people, that I speak,
    O'er whom, in time to come, I hope to reign;
    For I am rightful heir unto the crown.
  STAFFORD. Villain, thy father was a plasterer;
    And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not?
  CADE. And Adam was a gardener.
  WILLIAM STAFFORD. And what of that?
  CADE. Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,
    Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?
  STAFFORD. Ay, sir.
  CADE. By her he had two children at one birth.
  WILLIAM STAFFORD. That's false.
  CADE. Ay, there's the question; but I say 'tis true.  
    The elder of them being put to nurse,
    Was by a beggar-woman stol'n away,
    And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
    Became a bricklayer when he came to age.
    His son am I; deny it if you can.
  DICK. Nay, 'tis too true; therefore he shall be king.
  SMITH. Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, and the bricks
    are alive at this day to testify it; therefore deny it not.
  STAFFORD. And will you credit this base drudge's words
    That speaks he knows not what?
  ALL. Ay, marry, will we; therefore get ye gone.
  WILLIAM STAFFORD. Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this.
  CADE. [Aside] He lies, for I invented it myself- Go to, sirrah,
    tell the King from me that for his father's sake, Henry the
    Fifth, in whose time boys went to span-counter for French crowns,
    I am content he shall reign; but I'll be Protector over him.
  DICK. And furthermore, we'll have the Lord Say's head for selling
    the dukedom of Maine.
  CADE. And good reason; for thereby is England main'd and fain to go
    with a staff, but that my puissance holds it up. Fellow kings, I  
    tell you that that Lord Say hath gelded the commonwealth and made
    it an eunuch; and more than that, he can speak French, and
    therefore he is a traitor.
  STAFFORD. O gross and miserable ignorance!
  CADE. Nay, answer if you can; the Frenchmen are our enemies. Go to,
    then, I ask but this: can he that speaks with the tongue of an
    enemy be a good counsellor, or no?
  ALL. No, no; and therefore we'll have his head.
  WILLIAM STAFFORD. Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
    Assail them with the army of the King.
  STAFFORD. Herald, away; and throughout every town
    Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade;
    That those which fly before the battle ends
    May, even in their wives'and children's sight,
    Be hang'd up for example at their doors.
    And you that be the King's friends, follow me.
                           Exeunt the TWO STAFFORDS and soldiers
  CADE. And you that love the commons follow me.
    Now show yourselves men; 'tis for liberty.
    We will not leave one lord, one gentleman;  
    Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon,
    For they are thrifty honest men and such
    As would- but that they dare not- take our parts.
  DICK. They are all in order, and march toward us.
  CADE. But then are we in order when we are most out of order. Come,
    march forward.                                        Exeunt




SCENE III.
Another part of Blackheath

Alarums to the fight, wherein both the STAFFORDS are slain.
Enter CADE and the rest

  CADE. Where's Dick, the butcher of Ashford?
  DICK. Here, sir.
  CADE. They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou behavedst
    thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own slaughter-house;
    therefore thus will I reward thee- the Lent shall be as long
    again as it is, and thou shalt have a licence to kill for a
    hundred lacking one.
  DICK. I desire no more.
  CADE. And, to speak truth, thou deserv'st no less. [Putting on SIR
    HUMPHREY'S brigandine] This monument of the victory will I bear,
    and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse heels till I do come
    to London, where we will have the mayor's sword borne before us.
  DICK. If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the gaols and
    let out the prisoners.
  CADE. Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let's march towards
    London.                                               Exeunt




SCENE IV.
London. The palace

Enter the KING with a supplication, and the QUEEN with SUFFOLK'S head;
the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM, and the LORD SAY

  QUEEN. Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind
    And makes it fearful and degenerate;
    Think therefore on revenge and cease to weep.
    But who can cease to weep, and look on this?
    Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast;
    But where's the body that I should embrace?
  BUCKINGHAM. What answer makes your Grace to the rebels'
    supplication?
  KING HENRY. I'll send some holy bishop to entreat;
    For God forbid so many simple souls
    Should perish by the sword! And I myself,
    Rather than bloody war shall cut them short,
    Will parley with Jack Cade their general.
    But stay, I'll read it over once again.
  QUEEN. Ah, barbarous villains! Hath this lovely face  
    Rul'd like a wandering planet over me,
    And could it not enforce them to relent
    That were unworthy to behold the same?
  KING HENRY. Lord Say, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.
  SAY. Ay, but I hope your Highness shall have his.
  KING HENRY. How now, madam!
    Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death?
    I fear me, love, if that I had been dead,
    Thou wouldst not have mourn'd so much for me.
  QUEEN. No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.

                        Enter A MESSENGER

  KING HENRY. How now! What news? Why com'st thou in such haste?
  MESSENGER. The rebels are in Southwark; fly, my lord!
    Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
    Descended from the Duke of Clarence' house,
    And calls your Grace usurper, openly,
    And vows to crown himself in Westminster.
    His army is a ragged multitude  
    Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless;
    Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother's death
    Hath given them heart and courage to proceed.
    All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen,
    They call false caterpillars and intend their death.
  KING HENRY. O graceless men! they know not what they do.
  BUCKINGHAM. My gracious lord, retire to Killingworth
    Until a power be rais'd to put them down.
  QUEEN. Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
    These Kentish rebels would be soon appeas'd!
  KING HENRY. Lord Say, the traitors hate thee;
    Therefore away with us to Killingworth.
  SAY. So might your Grace's person be in danger.
    The sight of me is odious in their eyes;
    And therefore in this city will I stay
    And live alone as secret as I may.

                      Enter another MESSENGER

  SECOND MESSENGER. Jack Cade hath gotten London Bridge.  
    The citizens fly and forsake their houses;
    The rascal people, thirsting after prey,
    Join with the traitor; and they jointly swear
    To spoil the city and your royal court.
  BUCKINGHAM. Then linger not, my lord; away, take horse.
  KING HENRY. Come Margaret; God, our hope, will succour us.
  QUEEN. My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceas'd.
  KING HENRY. [To LORD SAY] Farewell, my lord, trust not the Kentish
    rebels.
  BUCKINGHAM. Trust nobody, for fear you be betray'd.
  SAY. The trust I have is in mine innocence,
    And therefore am I bold and resolute.                 Exeunt




SCENE V.
London. The Tower

Enter LORD SCALES Upon the Tower, walking. Then enter two or three CITIZENS,
below

  SCALES. How now! Is Jack Cade slain?
  FIRST CITIZEN. No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they have
    won the bridge, killing all those that withstand them.
    The Lord Mayor craves aid of your honour from the
    Tower, to defend the city from the rebels.
  SCALES. Such aid as I can spare you shall command,
    But I am troubled here with them myself;
    The rebels have assay'd to win the Tower.
    But get you to Smithfield, and gather head,
    And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe;
    Fight for your King, your country, and your lives;
    And so, farewell, for I must hence again.             Exeunt




SCENE VI.
London. Cannon street

Enter JACK CADE and the rest, and strikes his staff on London Stone

  CADE. Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting upon
    London Stone, I charge and command that, of the city's cost, the
    pissing conduit run nothing but claret wine this first year of
    our reign. And now henceforward it shall be treason for any that
    calls me other than Lord Mortimer.

                    Enter a SOLDIER, running

  SOLDIER. Jack Cade! Jack Cade!
  CADE. Knock him down there.                    [They kill him]
  SMITH. If this fellow be wise, he'll never call ye Jack Cade more;
    I think he hath a very fair warning.
  DICK. My lord, there's an army gathered together in Smithfield.
  CADE. Come then, let's go fight with them. But first go and set
    London Bridge on fire; and, if you can, burn down the Tower too.
    Come, let's away.                                     Exeunt




SCENE VII.
London. Smithfield

Alarums. MATTHEW GOFFE is slain, and all the rest.  Then enter JACK CADE,
with his company

  CADE. So, sirs. Now go some and pull down the Savoy; others to th'
    Inns of Court; down with them all.
  DICK. I have a suit unto your lordship.
  CADE. Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.
  DICK. Only that the laws of England may come out of your mouth.
  JOHN. [Aside] Mass, 'twill be sore law then; for he was thrust in
    the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole yet.
  SMITH. [Aside] Nay, John, it will be stinking law; for his breath
    stinks with eating toasted cheese.
  CADE. I have thought upon it; it shall be so. Away, burn all the
    records of the realm. My mouth shall be the Parliament of
    England.
  JOHN. [Aside] Then we are like to have biting statutes, unless his
    teeth be pull'd out.
  CADE. And henceforward all things shall be in common.
  
                          Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. My lord, a prize, a prize! Here's the Lord Say, which
    sold the towns in France; he that made us pay one and twenty
    fifteens, and one shining to the pound, the last subsidy.

                Enter GEORGE BEVIS, with the LORD SAY

  CADE. Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah, thou say,
    thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord! Now art thou within point
    blank of our jurisdiction regal. What canst thou answer to my
    Majesty for giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu the
    Dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these presence, even
    the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I am the besom that must
    sweep the court clean of such filth as thou art. Thou hast most
    traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a
    grammar school; and whereas, before, our forefathers had no other
    books but the score and the tally, thou hast caused printing to
    be us'd, and, contrary to the King, his crown, and dignity, thou
    hast built a paper-mill. It will be proved to thy face that thou  
    hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb, and
    such abominable words as no Christian ear can endure to hear.
    Thou hast appointed justices of peace, to call poor men before
    them about matters they were not able to answer. Moreover, thou
    hast put them in prison, and because they could not read, thou
    hast hang'd them, when, indeed, only for that cause they have
    been most worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost
    thou not?
  SAY. What of that?
  CADE. Marry, thou ought'st not to let thy horse wear a cloak, when
    honester men than thou go in their hose and doublets.
  DICK. And work in their shirt too, as myself, for example, that am
    a butcher.
  SAY. You men of Kent-
  DICK. What say you of Kent?
  SAY. Nothing but this: 'tis 'bona terra, mala gens.'
  CADE. Away with him, away with him! He speaks Latin.
  SAY. Hear me but speak, and bear me where you will.
    Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar writ,
    Is term'd the civil'st place of all this isle.  
    Sweet is the country, because full of riches;
    The people liberal valiant, active, wealthy;
    Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
    I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy;
    Yet, to recover them, would lose my life.
    Justice with favour have I always done;
    Pray'rs and tears have mov'd me, gifts could never.
    When have I aught exacted at your hands,
    But to maintain the King, the realm, and you?
    Large gifts have I bestow'd on learned clerks,
    Because my book preferr'd me to the King,
    And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
    Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
    Unless you be possess'd with devilish spirits
    You cannot but forbear to murder me.
    This tongue hath parley'd unto foreign kings
    For your behoof.
  CADE. Tut, when struck'st thou one blow in the field?
  SAY. Great men have reaching hands. Oft have I struck
    Those that I never saw, and struck them dead.  
  GEORGE. O monstrous coward! What, to come behind folks?
  SAY. These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.
  CADE. Give him a box o' th' ear, and that will make 'em red again.
  SAY. Long sitting to determine poor men's causes
    Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.
  CADE. Ye shall have a hempen caudle then, and the help of hatchet.
  DICK. Why dost thou quiver, man?
  SAY. The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.
  CADE. Nay, he nods at us, as who should say 'I'll be even with
    you'; I'll see if his head will stand steadier on a pole, or no.
    Take him away, and behead him.
  SAY. Tell me: wherein have I offended most?
    Have I affected wealth or honour? Speak.
    Are my chests fill'd up with extorted gold?
    Is my apparel sumptuous to behold?
    Whom have I injur'd, that ye seek my death?
    These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding,
    This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts.
    O, let me live!
  CADE. [Aside] I feel remorse in myself with his words; but I'll  
    bridle it. He shall die, an it be but for pleading so well for
    his life.- Away with him! He has a familiar under his tongue; he
    speaks not o' God's name. Go, take him away, I say, and strike
    off his head presently, and then break into his son-in-law's
    house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head, and bring them
    both upon two poles hither.
  ALL. It shall be done.
  SAY. Ah, countrymen! if when you make your pray'rs,
    God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
    How would it fare with your departed souls?
    And therefore yet relent and save my life.
  CADE. Away with him, and do as I command ye.  [Exeunt some with
    LORD SAY]  The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head
    on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute; there shall not a
    maid be married, but she shall pay to me her maidenhead ere they
    have it. Men shall hold of me in capite; and we charge and
    command that their wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue
    can tell.
  DICK. My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside, and take up
    commodities upon our bills?  
  CADE. Marry, presently.
  ALL. O, brave!

                      Re-enter one with the heads

  CADE. But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another, for they
    lov'd well when they were alive. Now part them again, lest they
    consult about the giving up of some more towns in France.
    Soldiers, defer the spoil of the city until night; for with these
    borne before us instead of maces will we ride through the
    streets, and at every corner have them kiss. Away!     Exeunt




SCENE VIII.
Southwark

Alarum and retreat. Enter again CADE and all his rabblement

  CADE. Up Fish Street! down Saint Magnus' Corner! Kill and knock
    down! Throw them into Thames!               [Sound a parley]
    What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to sound retreat
    or parley when I command them kill?

            Enter BUCKINGHAM and old CLIFFORD, attended

  BUCKINGHAM. Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee.
    And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
    Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the King
    Unto the commons whom thou hast misled;
    And here pronounce free pardon to them all
    That will forsake thee and go home in peace.
  CLIFFORD. What say ye, countrymen? Will ye relent
    And yield to mercy whilst 'tis offer'd you,
    Or let a rebel lead you to your deaths?
    Who loves the King, and will embrace his pardon,  
    Fling up his cap and say 'God save his Majesty!'
    Who hateth him and honours not his father,
    Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
    Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.
  ALL. God save the King! God save the King!
  CADE. What, Buckingham and Clifford, are ye so brave?
    And you, base peasants, do ye believe him? Will you needs be
    hang'd with your about your necks? Hath my sword therefore broke
    through London gates, that you should leave me at the White Hart
    in Southwark? I thought ye would never have given out these arms
    till you had recovered your ancient freedom. But you are all
    recreants and dastards, and delight to live in slavery to the
    nobility. Let them break your backs with burdens, take your
    houses over your heads, ravish your wives and daughters before
    your faces. For me, I will make shift for one; and so God's curse
    light upon you all!
  ALL. We'll follow Cade, we'll follow Cade!
  CLIFFORD. Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth,
    That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him?
    Will he conduct you through the heart of France,  
    And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
    Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to;
    Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
    Unless by robbing of your friends and us.
    Were't not a shame that whilst you live at jar
    The fearful French, whom you late vanquished,
    Should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you?
    Methinks already in this civil broil
    I see them lording it in London streets,
    Crying 'Villiago!' unto all they meet.
    Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry
    Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy.
    To France, to France, and get what you have lost;
    Spare England, for it is your native coast.
    Henry hath money; you are strong and manly.
    God on our side, doubt not of victory.
  ALL. A Clifford! a Clifford! We'll follow the King and Clifford.
  CADE. Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this
    multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them to an hundred
    mischiefs, and makes them leave me desolate. I see them lay their  
    heads together to surprise me. My sword make way for me for here
    is no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have through
    the very middest of you! and heavens and honour be witness that
    no want of resolution in me, but only my followers' base and
    ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my heels.
 Exit
  BUCKINGHAM. What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him;
    And he that brings his head unto the King
    Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.
                                             Exeunt some of them
    Follow me, soldiers; we'll devise a mean
    To reconcile you all unto the King.                   Exeunt




SCENE IX.
Killing, worth Castle

Sound trumpets. Enter KING, QUEEN, and SOMERSET, on the terrace

  KING HENRY. Was ever king that joy'd an earthly throne
    And could command no more content than I?
    No sooner was I crept out of my cradle
    But I was made a king, at nine months old.
    Was never subject long'd to be a King
    As I do long and wish to be a subject.

               Enter BUCKINGHAM and old CLIFFORD

  BUCKINGHAM. Health and glad tidings to your Majesty!
  KING HENRY. Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surpris'd?
    Or is he but retir'd to make him strong?

     Enter, below, multitudes, with halters about their necks

  CLIFFORD. He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield,  
    And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
    Expect your Highness' doom of life or death.
  KING HENRY. Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates,
    To entertain my vows of thanks and praise!
    Soldiers, this day have you redeem'd your lives,
    And show'd how well you love your Prince and country.
    Continue still in this so good a mind,
    And Henry, though he be infortunate,
    Assure yourselves, will never be unkind.
    And so, with thanks and pardon to you all,
    I do dismiss you to your several countries.
  ALL. God save the King! God save the King!

                     Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. Please it your Grace to be advertised
    The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland
    And with a puissant and a mighty power
    Of gallowglasses and stout kerns
    Is marching hitherward in proud array,  
    And still proclaimeth, as he comes along,
    His arms are only to remove from thee
    The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms a traitor.
  KING HENRY. Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distress'd;
    Like to a ship that, having scap'd a tempest,
    Is straightway calm'd, and boarded with a pirate;
    But now is Cade driven back, his men dispers'd,
    And now is York in arms to second him.
    I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him
    And ask him what's the reason of these arms.
    Tell him I'll send Duke Edmund to the Tower-
    And Somerset, we will commit thee thither
    Until his army be dismiss'd from him.
  SOMERSET. My lord,
    I'll yield myself to prison willingly,
    Or unto death, to do my country good.
  KING HENRY. In any case be not too rough in terms,
    For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.
  BUCKINGHAM. I will, my lord, and doubt not so to deal
    As all things shall redound unto your good.  
  KING HENRY. Come, wife, let's in, and learn to govern better;
    For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
                                                Flourish. Exeunt




SCENE X.
Kent. Iden's garden

Enter CADE

  CADE. Fie on ambitions! Fie on myself, that have a sword and yet am
    ready to famish! These five days have I hid me in these woods and
    durst not peep out, for all the country is laid for me; but now
    am I so hungry that, if I might have a lease of my life for a
    thousand years, I could stay no longer. Wherefore, on a brick
    wall have I climb'd into this garden, to see if I can eat grass
    or pick a sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a
    man's stomach this hot weather. And I think this word 'sallet'
    was born to do me good; for many a time, but for a sallet, my
    brain-pain had been cleft with a brown bill; and many a time,
    when I have been dry, and bravely marching, it hath serv'd me
    instead of a quart-pot to drink in; and now the word 'sallet'
    must serve me to feed on.

                             Enter IDEN

  IDEN. Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court  
    And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
    This small inheritance my father left me
    Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.
    I seek not to wax great by others' waning
    Or gather wealth I care not with what envy;
    Sufficeth that I have maintains my state,
    And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
  CADE. Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for
    entering his fee-simple without leave. Ah, villain, thou wilt
    betray me, and get a thousand crowns of the King by carrying my
    head to him; but I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich and
    swallow my sword like a great pin ere thou and I part.
  IDEN. Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be,
    I know thee not; why then should I betray thee?
    Is't not enough to break into my garden
    And like a thief to come to rob my grounds,
    Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
    But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
  CADE. Brave thee? Ay, by the best blood that ever was broach'd, and
    beard thee too. Look on me well: I have eat no meat these five  
    days, yet come thou and thy five men and if I do not leave you
    all as dead as a door-nail, I pray God I may never eat grass
    more.
  IDEN. Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands,
    That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent,
    Took odds to combat a poor famish'd man.
    Oppose thy steadfast-gazing eyes to mine;
    See if thou canst outface me with thy looks;
    Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser;
    Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
    Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon;
    My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast,
    And if mine arm be heaved in the air,
    Thy grave is digg'd already in the earth.
    As for words, whose greatness answers words,
    Let this my sword report what speech forbears.
  CADE. By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I heard!
    Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out the burly bon'd
    clown in chines of beef ere thou sleep in thy sheath, I beseech
    God on my knees thou mayst be turn'd to hobnails. [Here they  
    fight; CADE falls] O, I am slain! famine and no other hath slain
    me. Let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me but the
    ten meals I have lost, and I'd defy them all. Wither, garden, and
    be henceforth a burying place to all that do dwell in this house,
    because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
  IDEN. Is't Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor?
    Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed
    And hang thee o'er my tomb when I am dead.
    Ne'er shall this blood be wiped from thy point,
    But thou shalt wear it as a herald's coat
    To emblaze the honour that thy master got.
  CADE. Iden, farewell; and be proud of thy victory. Tell Kent from
    me she hath lost her best man, and exhort all the world to be
    cowards; for I, that never feared any, am vanquished by famine,
    not by valour.                                        [Dies]
  IDEN. How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge.
    Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee!
    And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
    So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
    Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels  
    Unto a dunghill, which shall be thy grave,
    And there cut off thy most ungracious head,
    Which I will bear in triumph to the King,
    Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon.               Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
Fields between Dartford and Blackheath

Enter YORK, and his army of Irish, with drum and colours

  YORK. From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right
    And pluck the crown from feeble Henry's head:
    Ring bells aloud, burn bonfires clear and bright,
    To entertain great England's lawful king.
    Ah, sancta majestas! who would not buy thee dear?
    Let them obey that knows not how to rule;
    This hand was made to handle nought but gold.
    I cannot give due action to my words
    Except a sword or sceptre balance it.
    A sceptre shall it have, have I a soul
    On which I'll toss the flower-de-luce of France.

                         Enter BUCKINGHAM

    [Aside] Whom have we here? Buckingham, to disturb me?
    The King hath sent him, sure: I must dissemble.
  BUCKINGHAM. York, if thou meanest well I greet thee well.  
  YORK. Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
    Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?
  BUCKINGHAM. A messenger from Henry, our dread liege,
    To know the reason of these arms in peace;
    Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
    Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn,
    Should raise so great a power without his leave,
    Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.
  YORK. [Aside] Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great.
    O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint,
    I am so angry at these abject terms;
    And now, like Ajax Telamonius,
    On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury.
    I am far better born than is the King,
    More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts;
    But I must make fair weather yet awhile,
    Till Henry be more weak and I more strong.-
    Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me
    That I have given no answer all this while;
    My mind was troubled with deep melancholy.  
    The cause why I have brought this army hither
    Is to remove proud Somerset from the King,
    Seditious to his Grace and to the state.
  BUCKINGHAM. That is too much presumption on thy part;
    But if thy arms be to no other end,
    The King hath yielded unto thy demand:
    The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
  YORK. Upon thine honour, is he prisoner?
  BUCKINGHAM. Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.
  YORK. Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my pow'rs.
    Soldiers, I thank you all; disperse yourselves;
    Meet me to-morrow in Saint George's field,
    You shall have pay and everything you wish.
    And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry,
    Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons,
    As pledges of my fealty and love.
    I'll send them all as willing as I live:
    Lands, goods, horse, armour, anything I have,
    Is his to use, so Somerset may die.
  BUCKINGHAM. York, I commend this kind submission.  
    We twain will go into his Highness' tent.

                  Enter the KING, and attendants

  KING HENRY. Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us,
    That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?
  YORK. In all submission and humility
    York doth present himself unto your Highness.
  KING HENRY. Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?
  YORK. To heave the traitor Somerset from hence,
    And fight against that monstrous rebel Cade,
    Who since I heard to be discomfited.

                    Enter IDEN, with CADE's head

  IDEN. If one so rude and of so mean condition
    May pass into the presence of a king,
    Lo, I present your Grace a traitor's head,
    The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.
  KING HENRY. The head of Cade! Great God, how just art Thou!  
    O, let me view his visage, being dead,
    That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
    Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?
  IDEN. I was, an't like your Majesty.
  KING HENRY. How art thou call'd? And what is thy degree?
  IDEN. Alexander Iden, that's my name;
    A poor esquire of Kent that loves his king.
  BUCKINGHAM. So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss
    He were created knight for his good service.
  KING HENRY. Iden, kneel down. [He kneels] Rise up a knight.
    We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
    And will that thou thenceforth attend on us.
  IDEN. May Iden live to merit such a bounty,
    And never live but true unto his liege!

                    Enter the QUEEN and SOMERSET

  KING HENRY. See, Buckingham! Somerset comes with th' Queen:
    Go, bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.
  QUEEN. For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head,  
    But boldly stand and front him to his face.
  YORK. How now! Is Somerset at liberty?
    Then, York, unloose thy long-imprisoned thoughts
    And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
    Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?
    False king, why hast thou broken faith with me,
    Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse?
    King did I call thee? No, thou art not king;
    Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
    Which dar'st not, no, nor canst not rule a traitor.
    That head of thine doth not become a crown;
    Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff,
    And not to grace an awful princely sceptre.
    That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
    Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear,
    Is able with the change to kill and cure.
    Here is a hand to hold a sceptre up,
    And with the same to act controlling laws.
    Give place. By heaven, thou shalt rule no more
    O'er him whom heaven created for thy ruler.  
  SOMERSET. O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,
    Of capital treason 'gainst the King and crown.
    Obey, audacious traitor; kneel for grace.
  YORK. Wouldst have me kneel? First let me ask of these,
    If they can brook I bow a knee to man.
    Sirrah, call in my sons to be my bail:        Exit attendant
    I know, ere thy will have me go to ward,
    They'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.
  QUEEN. Call hither Clifford; bid him come amain,
    To say if that the bastard boys of York
    Shall be the surety for their traitor father.
                                                 Exit BUCKINGHAM
  YORK. O blood-bespotted Neapolitan,
    Outcast of Naples, England's bloody scourge!
    The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
    Shall be their father's bail; and bane to those
    That for my surety will refuse the boys!

               Enter EDWARD and RICHARD PLANTAGENET
  
    See where they come: I'll warrant they'll make it good.

                     Enter CLIFFORD and his SON

  QUEEN. And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.
  CLIFFORD. Health and all happiness to my lord the King!
                                                        [Kneels]
  YORK. I thank thee, Clifford. Say, what news with thee?
    Nay, do not fright us with an angry look.
    We are thy sovereign, Clifford, kneel again;
    For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.
  CLIFFORD. This is my King, York, I do not mistake;
    But thou mistakes me much to think I do.
    To Bedlam with him! Is the man grown mad?
  KING HENRY. Ay, Clifford; a bedlam and ambitious humour
    Makes him oppose himself against his king.
  CLIFFORD. He is a traitor; let him to the Tower,
    And chop away that factious pate of his.
  QUEEN. He is arrested, but will not obey;
    His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.  
  YORK. Will you not, sons?
  EDWARD. Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.
  RICHARD. And if words will not, then our weapons shall.
  CLIFFORD. Why, what a brood of traitors have we here!
  YORK. Look in a glass, and call thy image so:
    I am thy king, and thou a false-heart traitor.
    Call hither to the stake my two brave bears,
    That with the very shaking of their chains
    They may astonish these fell-lurking curs.
    Bid Salisbury and Warwick come to me.

               Enter the EARLS OF WARWICK and SALISBURY

  CLIFFORD. Are these thy bears? We'll bait thy bears to death,
    And manacle the berard in their chains,
    If thou dar'st bring them to the baiting-place.
  RICHARD. Oft have I seen a hot o'er weening cur
    Run back and bite, because he was withheld;
    Who, being suffer'd, with the bear's fell paw,
    Hath clapp'd his tail between his legs and cried;  
    And such a piece of service will you do,
    If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick.
  CLIFFORD. Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
    As crooked in thy manners as thy shape!
  YORK. Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.
  CLIFFORD. Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves.
  KING HENRY. Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?
    Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair,
    Thou mad misleader of thy brainsick son!
    What, wilt thou on thy death-bed play the ruffian
    And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles?
    O, where is faith? O, where is loyalty?
    If it be banish'd from the frosty head,
    Where shall it find a harbour in the earth?
    Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war
    And shame thine honourable age with blood?
    Why art thou old, and want'st experience?
    Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it?
    For shame! In duty bend thy knee to me,
    That bows unto the grave with mickle age.  
  SALISBURY. My lord, I have considered with myself
    The tide of this most renowned duke,
    And in my conscience do repute his Grace
    The rightful heir to England's royal seat.
  KING HENRY. Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?
  SALISBURY. I have.
  KING HENRY. Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?
  SALISBURY. It is great sin to swear unto a sin;
    But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.
    Who can be bound by any solemn vow
    To do a murd'rous deed, to rob a man,
    To force a spotless virgin's chastity,
    To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
    To wring the widow from her custom'd right,
    And have no other reason for this wrong
    But that he was bound by a solemn oath?
  QUEEN. A subtle traitor needs no sophister.
  KING HENRY. Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
  YORK. Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,
    I am resolv'd for death or dignity.  
  CLIFFORD. The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.
  WARWICK. You were best to go to bed and dream again
    To keep thee from the tempest of the field.
  CLIFFORD. I am resolv'd to bear a greater storm
    Than any thou canst conjure up to-day;
    And that I'll write upon thy burgonet,
    Might I but know thee by thy household badge.
  WARWICK. Now, by my father's badge, old Nevil's crest,
    The rampant bear chain'd to the ragged staff,
    This day I'll wear aloft my burgonet,
    As on a mountain-top the cedar shows,
    That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm,
    Even to affright thee with the view thereof.
  CLIFFORD. And from thy burgonet I'll rend thy bear
    And tread it under foot with all contempt,
    Despite the berard that protects the bear.
  YOUNG CLIFFORD. And so to arms, victorious father,
    To quell the rebels and their complices.
  RICHARD. Fie! charity, for shame! Speak not in spite,
    For you shall sup with Jesu Christ to-night.  
  YOUNG CLIFFORD. Foul stigmatic, that's more than thou canst tell.
  RICHARD. If not in heaven, you'll surely sup in hell.
                                                Exeunt severally




SCENE II.
Saint Albans

Alarums to the battle. Enter WARWICK

  WARWICK. Clifford of Cumberland, 'tis Warwick calls;
    And if thou dost not hide thee from the bear,
    Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum
    And dead men's cries do fill the empty air,
    Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me.
    Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
  WARWICK is hoarse with calling thee to arms.

                          Enter YORK

    How now, my noble lord! what, all a-foot?
  YORK. The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed;
    But match to match I have encount'red him,
    And made a prey for carrion kites and crows
    Even of the bonny beast he lov'd so well.

                      Enter OLD CLIFFORD  

  WARWICK. Of one or both of us the time is come.
  YORK. Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase,
    For I myself must hunt this deer to death.
  WARWICK. Then, nobly, York; 'tis for a crown thou fight'st.
    As I intend, Clifford, to thrive to-day,
    It grieves my soul to leave thee unassail'd.            Exit
  CLIFFORD. What seest thou in me, York? Why dost thou pause?
  YORK. With thy brave bearing should I be in love
    But that thou art so fast mine enemy.
  CLIFFORD. Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem
    But that 'tis shown ignobly and in treason.
  YORK. So let it help me now against thy sword,
    As I in justice and true right express it!
  CLIFFORD. My soul and body on the action both!
  YORK. A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.
                                 [They fight and CLIFFORD falls]
  CLIFFORD. La fin couronne les oeuvres.                  [Dies]
  YORK. Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.
    Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will!         Exit  

                     Enter YOUNG CLIFFORD

  YOUNG CLIFFORD. Shame and confusion! All is on the rout;
    Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds
    Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell,
    Whom angry heavens do make their minister,
    Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part
    Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.
    He that is truly dedicate to war
    Hath no self-love; nor he that loves himself
    Hath not essentially, but by circumstance,
    The name of valour.                 [Sees his father's body]
    O, let the vile world end
    And the premised flames of the last day
    Knit earth and heaven together!
    Now let the general trumpet blow his blast,
    Particularities and petty sounds
    To cease! Wast thou ordain'd, dear father,
    To lose thy youth in peace and to achieve  
    The silver livery of advised age,
    And in thy reverence and thy chair-days thus
    To die in ruffian battle? Even at this sight
    My heart is turn'd to stone; and while 'tis mine
    It shall be stony. York not our old men spares;
    No more will I their babes. Tears virginal
    Shall be to me even as the dew to fire;
    And beauty, that the tyrant oft reclaims,
    Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.
    Henceforth I will not have to do with pity:
    Meet I an infant of the house of York,
    Into as many gobbets will I cut it
    As wild Medea young Absyrtus did;
    In cruelty will I seek out my fame.
    Come, thou new ruin of old Clifford's house;
    As did Aeneas old Anchises bear,
    So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders;
    But then Aeneas bare a living load,
    Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.
                                              Exit with the body  

       Enter RICHARD and SOMERSET to fight. SOMERSET is killed

  RICHARD. So, lie thou there;
    For underneath an alehouse' paltry sign,
    The Castle in Saint Albans, Somerset
    Hath made the wizard famous in his death.
    Sword, hold thy temper; heart, be wrathful still:
    Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.             Exit

        Fight. Excursions. Enter KING, QUEEN, and others

  QUEEN. Away, my lord! You are slow; for shame, away!
  KING HENRY. Can we outrun the heavens? Good Margaret, stay.
  QUEEN. What are you made of? You'll nor fight nor fly.
    Now is it manhood, wisdom, and defence,
    To give the enemy way, and to secure us
    By what we can, which can no more but fly.
                                               [Alarum afar off]
    If you be ta'en, we then should see the bottom  
    Of all our fortunes; but if we haply scape-
    As well we may, if not through your neglect-
    We shall to London get, where you are lov'd,
    And where this breach now in our fortunes made
    May readily be stopp'd.

                     Re-enter YOUNG CLIFFORD

  YOUNG CLIFFORD. But that my heart's on future mischief set,
    I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly;
    But fly you must; uncurable discomfit
    Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
    Away, for your relief! and we will live
    To see their day and them our fortune give.
    Away, my lord, away!                                  Exeunt




SCENE III.
Fields near Saint Albans

Alarum. Retreat. Enter YORK, RICHARD, WARWICK, and soldiers,
with drum and colours

  YORK. Of Salisbury, who can report of him,
    That winter lion, who in rage forgets
    Aged contusions and all brush of time
    And, like a gallant in the brow of youth,
    Repairs him with occasion? This happy day
    Is not itself, nor have we won one foot,
    If Salisbury be lost.
  RICHARD. My noble father,
    Three times to-day I holp him to his horse,
    Three times bestrid him, thrice I led him off,
    Persuaded him from any further act;
    But still where danger was, still there I met him;
    And like rich hangings in a homely house,
    So was his will in his old feeble body.
    But, noble as he is, look where he comes.
  
                         Enter SALISBURY

  SALISBURY. Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought to-day!
    By th' mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard:
    God knows how long it is I have to live,
    And it hath pleas'd Him that three times to-day
    You have defended me from imminent death.
    Well, lords, we have not got that which we have;
    'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,
    Being opposites of such repairing nature.
  YORK. I know our safety is to follow them;
    For, as I hear, the King is fled to London
    To call a present court of Parliament.
    Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth.
    What says Lord Warwick? Shall we after them?
  WARWICK. After them? Nay, before them, if we can.
    Now, by my faith, lords, 'twas a glorious day:
    Saint Albans' battle, won by famous York,
    Shall be eterniz'd in all age to come.
    Sound drum and trumpets and to London all;  
    And more such days as these to us befall!             Exeunt


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1591

THE THIRD PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  KING HENRY THE SIXTH
  EDWARD, PRINCE OF WALES, his son
  LEWIS XI, King of France           DUKE OF SOMERSET
  DUKE OF EXETER                     EARL OF OXFORD
  EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND             EARL OF WESTMORELAND
  LORD CLIFFORD
  RICHARD PLANTAGENET, DUKE OF YORK
  EDWARD, EARL OF MARCH, afterwards KING EDWARD IV, his son
  EDMUND, EARL OF RUTLAND, his son
  GEORGE, afterwards DUKE OF CLARENCE, his son
  RICHARD, afterwards DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, his son
  DUKE OF NORFOLK                    MARQUIS OF MONTAGUE
  EARL OF WARWICK                    EARL OF PEMBROKE
  LORD HASTINGS                      LORD STAFFORD
  SIR JOHN MORTIMER, uncle to the Duke of York
  SIR HUGH MORTIMER, uncle to the Duke of York
  HENRY, EARL OF RICHMOND, a youth
  LORD RIVERS, brother to Lady Grey
  SIR WILLIAM STANLEY                SIR JOHN MONTGOMERY
  SIR JOHN SOMERVILLE                TUTOR, to Rutland  
  MAYOR OF YORK                      LIEUTENANT OF THE TOWER
  A NOBLEMAN                         TWO KEEPERS
  A HUNTSMAN
  A SON that has killed his father
  A FATHER that has killed his son

  QUEEN MARGARET
  LADY GREY, afterwards QUEEN to Edward IV
  BONA, sister to the French Queen

  Soldiers, Attendants, Messengers, Watchmen, etc.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
England and France

ACT I. SCENE I.
London. The Parliament House

Alarum. Enter DUKE OF YORK, EDWARD, RICHARD, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, WARWICK,
and soldiers, with white roses in their hats

  WARWICK. I wonder how the King escap'd our hands.
  YORK. While we pursu'd the horsemen of the north,
    He slily stole away and left his men;
    Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
    Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
    Cheer'd up the drooping army, and himself,
    Lord Clifford, and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
    Charg'd our main battle's front, and, breaking in,
    Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.
  EDWARD. Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
    Is either slain or wounded dangerous;
    I cleft his beaver with a downright blow.
    That this is true, father, behold his blood.
  MONTAGUE. And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
    Whom I encount'red as the battles join'd.  
  RICHARD. Speak thou for me, and tell them what I did.
                                 [Throwing down SOMERSET'S head]
  YORK. Richard hath best deserv'd of all my sons.
    But is your Grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?
  NORFOLK. Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!
  RICHARD. Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.
  WARWICK. And so do I. Victorious Prince of York,
    Before I see thee seated in that throne
    Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
    I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
    This is the palace of the fearful King,
    And this the regal seat. Possess it, York;
    For this is thine, and not King Henry's heirs'.
  YORK. Assist me then, sweet Warwick, and I will;
    For hither we have broken in by force.
  NORFOLK. We'll all assist you; he that flies shall die.
  YORK. Thanks, gentle Norfolk. Stay by me, my lords;
    And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.
                                                    [They go up]
  WARWICK. And when the King comes, offer him no violence.  
    Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
  YORK. The Queen this day here holds her parliament,
    But little thinks we shall be of her council.
    By words or blows here let us win our right.
  RICHARD. Arm'd as we are, let's stay within this house.
  WARWICK. The bloody parliament shall this be call'd,
    Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be King,
    And bashful Henry depos'd, whose cowardice
    Hath made us by-words to our enemies.
  YORK. Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute:
    I mean to take possession of my right.
  WARWICK. Neither the King, nor he that loves him best,
    The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
    Dares stir a wing if Warwick shake his bells.
    I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares.
    Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.
                                      [YORK occupies the throne]

       Flourish. Enter KING HENRY, CLIFFORD, NORTHUMBERLAND,
        WESTMORELAND, EXETER, and others, with red roses in  
                            their hats

  KING HENRY. My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
    Even in the chair of state! Belike he means,
    Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
    To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
    Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father;
    And thine, Lord Clifford; and you both have vow'd revenge
    On him, his sons, his favourites, and his friends.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. If I be not, heavens be reveng'd on me!
  CLIFFORD. The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.
  WESTMORELAND. What, shall we suffer this? Let's pluck him down;
    My heart for anger burns; I cannot brook it.
  KING HENRY. Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.
  CLIFFORD. Patience is for poltroons such as he;
    He durst not sit there had your father liv'd.
    My gracious lord, here in the parliament
    Let us assail the family of York.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Well hast thou spoken, cousin; be it so.
  KING HENRY. Ah, know you not the city favours them,  
    And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
  EXETER. But when the Duke is slain they'll quickly fly.
  KING HENRY. Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
    To make a shambles of the parliament house!
    Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words, and threats,
    Shall be the war that Henry means to use.
    Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne
    And kneel for grace and mercy at my feet;
    I am thy sovereign.
  YORK. I am thine.
  EXETER. For shame, come down; he made thee Duke of York.
  YORK. 'Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.
  EXETER. Thy father was a traitor to the crown.
  WARWICK. Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
    In following this usurping Henry.
  CLIFFORD. Whom should he follow but his natural king?
  WARWICK. True, Clifford; and that's Richard Duke of York.
  KING HENRY. And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?
  YORK. It must and shall be so; content thyself.
  WARWICK. Be Duke of Lancaster; let him be King.  
  WESTMORELAND. He is both King and Duke of Lancaster;
    And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.
  WARWICK. And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
    That we are those which chas'd you from the field,
    And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
    March'd through the city to the palace gates.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
    And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.
  WESTMORELAND. Plantagenet, of thee, and these thy sons,
    Thy kinsmen, and thy friends, I'll have more lives
    Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.
  CLIFFORD. Urge it no more; lest that instead of words
    I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
    As shall revenge his death before I stir.
  WARWICK. Poor Clifford, how I scorn his worthless threats!
  YORK. Will you we show our title to the crown?
    If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.
  KING HENRY. What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
    Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York;
    Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:  
    I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
    Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop,
    And seiz'd upon their towns and provinces.
  WARWICK. Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.
  KING HENRY. The Lord Protector lost it, and not I:
    When I was crown'd, I was but nine months old.
  RICHARD. You are old enough now, and yet methinks you lose.
    Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.
  EDWARD. Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.
  MONTAGUE. Good brother, as thou lov'st and honourest arms,
    Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.
  RICHARD. Sound drums and trumpets, and the King will fly.
  YORK. Sons, peace!
  KING HENRY. Peace thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.
  WARWICK. Plantagenet shall speak first. Hear him, lords;
    And be you silent and attentive too,
    For he that interrupts him shall not live.
  KING HENRY. Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
    Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
    No; first shall war unpeople this my realm;  
    Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
    And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
    Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
    My title's good, and better far than his.
  WARWICK. Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be King.
  KING HENRY. Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.
  YORK. 'Twas by rebellion against his king.
  KING HENRY. [Aside] I know not what to say; my title's weak.-
    Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?
  YORK. What then?
  KING HENRY. An if he may, then am I lawful King;
    For Richard, in the view of many lords,
    Resign'd the crown to Henry the Fourth,
    Whose heir my father was, and I am his.
  YORK. He rose against him, being his sovereign,
    And made him to resign his crown perforce.
  WARWICK. Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd,
    Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?
  EXETER. No; for he could not so resign his crown
    But that the next heir should succeed and reign.  
  KING HENRY. Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?
  EXETER. His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
  YORK. Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?
  EXETER. My conscience tells me he is lawful King.
  KING HENRY. [Aside] All will revolt from me, and turn to him.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
    Think not that Henry shall be so depos'd.
  WARWICK. Depos'd he shall be, in despite of all.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Thou art deceiv'd. 'Tis not thy southern power
    Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
    Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
    Can set the Duke up in despite of me.
  CLIFFORD. King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
    Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence.
    May that ground gape, and swallow me alive,
    Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!
  KING HENRY. O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!
  YORK. Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.
    What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?
  WARWICK. Do right unto this princely Duke of York;  
    Or I will fill the house with armed men,
    And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
    Write up his title with usurping blood.
                                [He stamps with his foot and the
                                       soldiers show themselves]
  KING HENRY. My Lord of Warwick, hear but one word:
    Let me for this my life-time reign as king.
  YORK. Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
    And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou liv'st.
  KING HENRY. I am content. Richard Plantagenet,
    Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.
  CLIFFORD. What wrong is this unto the Prince your son!
  WARWICK. What good is this to England and himself!
  WESTMORELAND. Base, fearful, and despairing Henry!
  CLIFFORD. How hast thou injur'd both thyself and or us!
  WESTMORELAND. I cannot stay to hear these articles.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Nor I.
  CLIFFORD. Come, cousin, let us tell the Queen these news.
  WESTMORELAND. Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
    In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.  
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Be thou a prey unto the house of York
    And die in bands for this unmanly deed!
  CLIFFORD. In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
    Or live in peace abandon'd and despis'd!
                                Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND, CLIFFORD,
                                                and WESTMORELAND
  WARWICK. Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.
  EXETER. They seek revenge, and therefore will not yield.
  KING HENRY. Ah, Exeter!
  WARWICK. Why should you sigh, my lord?
  KING HENRY. Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
    Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
    But be it as it may. [To YORK] I here entail
    The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever;
    Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
    To cease this civil war, and, whilst I live,
    To honour me as thy king and sovereign,
    And neither by treason nor hostility
    To seek to put me down and reign thyself.
  YORK. This oath I willingly take, and will perform.  
                                        [Coming from the throne]
  WARWICK. Long live King Henry! Plantagenet, embrace him.
  KING HENRY. And long live thou, and these thy forward sons!
  YORK. Now York and Lancaster are reconcil'd.
  EXETER. Accurs'd be he that seeks to make them foes!
                                   [Sennet. Here they come down]
  YORK. Farewell, my gracious lord; I'll to my castle.
  WARWICK. And I'll keep London with my soldiers.
  NORFOLK. And I to Norfolk with my followers.
  MONTAGUE. And I unto the sea, from whence I came.
                                             Exeunt the YORKISTS
  KING HENRY. And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.

            Enter QUEEN MARGARET and the PRINCE OF WALES

  EXETER. Here comes the Queen, whose looks bewray her anger.
    I'll steal away.
  KING HENRY. Exeter, so will I.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.
  KING HENRY. Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.  
  QUEEN MARGARET. Who can be patient in such extremes?
    Ah, wretched man! Would I had died a maid,
    And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
    Seeing thou hast prov'd so unnatural a father!
    Hath he deserv'd to lose his birthright thus?
    Hadst thou but lov'd him half so well as I,
    Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
    Or nourish'd him as I did with my blood,
    Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there
    Rather than have made that savage duke thine heir,
    And disinherited thine only son.
  PRINCE OF WALES. Father, you cannot disinherit me.
    If you be King, why should not I succeed?
  KING HENRY. Pardon me, Margaret; pardon me, sweet son.
    The Earl of Warwick and the Duke enforc'd me.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Enforc'd thee! Art thou King and wilt be
      forc'd?
    I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch!
    Thou hast undone thyself, thy son, and me;
    And giv'n unto the house of York such head  
    As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
    To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
    What is it but to make thy sepulchre
    And creep into it far before thy time?
    Warwick is Chancellor and the lord of Calais;
    Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas;
    The Duke is made Protector of the realm;
    And yet shalt thou be safe? Such safety finds
    The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
    Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
    The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes
    Before I would have granted to that act.
    But thou prefer'st thy life before thine honour;
    And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself,
    Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
    Until that act of parliament be repeal'd
    Whereby my son is disinherited.
    The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
    Will follow mine, if once they see them spread;
    And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace  
    And utter ruin of the house of York.
    Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let's away;
    Our army is ready; come, we'll after them.
  KING HENRY. Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Thou hast spoke too much already; get thee gone.
  KING HENRY. Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Ay, to be murder'd by his enemies.
  PRINCE OF WALES. When I return with victory from the field
    I'll see your Grace; till then I'll follow her.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Come, son, away; we may not linger thus.
                            Exeunt QUEEN MARGARET and the PRINCE
  KING HENRY. Poor queen! How love to me and to her son
    Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
    Reveng'd may she be on that hateful Duke,
    Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
    Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
    Tire on the flesh of me and of my son!
    The loss of those three lords torments my heart.
    I'll write unto them, and entreat them fair;
    Come, cousin, you shall be the messenger.  
  EXETER. And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.        Exeunt




SCENE II.
Sandal Castle, near Wakefield, in Yorkshire

Flourish. Enter EDWARD, RICHARD, and MONTAGUE

  RICHARD. Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.
  EDWARD. No, I can better play the orator.
  MONTAGUE. But I have reasons strong and forcible.

                     Enter the DUKE OF YORK

  YORK. Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
    What is your quarrel? How began it first?
  EDWARD. No quarrel, but a slight contention.
  YORK. About what?
  RICHARD. About that which concerns your Grace and us-
    The crown of England, father, which is yours.
  YORK. Mine, boy? Not till King Henry be dead.
  RICHARD. Your right depends not on his life or death.
  EDWARD. Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now.
    By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
    It will outrun you, father, in the end.  
  YORK. I took an oath that he should quietly reign.
  EDWARD. But for a kingdom any oath may be broken:
    I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.
  RICHARD. No; God forbid your Grace should be forsworn.
  YORK. I shall be, if I claim by open war.
  RICHARD. I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.
  YORK. Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.
  RICHARD. An oath is of no moment, being not took
    Before a true and lawful magistrate
    That hath authority over him that swears.
    Henry had none, but did usurp the place;
    Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
    Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
    Therefore, to arms. And, father, do but think
    How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown,
    Within whose circuit is Elysium
    And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
    Why do we linger thus? I cannot rest
    Until the white rose that I wear be dy'd
    Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.  
  YORK. Richard, enough; I will be King, or die.
    Brother, thou shalt to London presently
    And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.
    Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk
    And tell him privily of our intent.
    You, Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
    With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise;
    In them I trust, for they are soldiers,
    Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
    While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more
    But that I seek occasion how to rise,
    And yet the King not privy to my drift,
    Nor any of the house of Lancaster?

                      Enter a MESSENGER

    But, stay. What news? Why com'st thou in such post?
  MESSENGER. The Queen with all the northern earls and lords
    Intend here to besiege you in your castle.
    She is hard by with twenty thousand men;  
    And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.
  YORK. Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them?
    Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
    My brother Montague shall post to London.
    Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
    Whom we have left protectors of the King,
    With pow'rful policy strengthen themselves
    And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.
  MONTAGUE. Brother, I go; I'll win them, fear it not.
    And thus most humbly I do take my leave.                Exit

              Enter SIR JOHN and SIR HUGH MORTIMER

  YORK. Sir john and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles!
    You are come to Sandal in a happy hour;
    The army of the Queen mean to besiege us.
  SIR JOHN. She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field.
  YORK. What, with five thousand men?
  RICHARD. Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need.
    A woman's general; what should we fear?  
                                              [A march afar off]
  EDWARD. I hear their drums. Let's set our men in order,
    And issue forth and bid them battle straight.
  YORK. Five men to twenty! Though the odds be great,
    I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
    Many a battle have I won in France,
    When as the enemy hath been ten to one;
    Why should I not now have the like success?           Exeunt




SCENE III.
Field of battle between Sandal Castle and Wakefield

Alarum. Enter RUTLAND and his TUTOR

  RUTLAND. Ah, whither shall I fly to scape their hands?
    Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes!

                  Enter CLIFFORD and soldiers

  CLIFFORD. Chaplain, away! Thy priesthood saves thy life.
    As for the brat of this accursed duke,
    Whose father slew my father, he shall die.
  TUTOR. And I, my lord, will bear him company.
  CLIFFORD. Soldiers, away with him!
  TUTOR. Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
    Lest thou be hated both of God and man.
                                    Exit, forced off by soldiers
  CLIFFORD. How now, is he dead already? Or is it fear
    That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.
  RUTLAND. So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
    That trembles under his devouring paws;  
    And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey,
    And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.
    Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
    And not with such a cruel threat'ning look!
    Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
    I am too mean a subject for thy wrath;
    Be thou reveng'd on men, and let me live.
  CLIFFORD. In vain thou speak'st, poor boy; my father's blood
    Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.
  RUTLAND. Then let my father's blood open it again:
    He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.
  CLIFFORD. Had I thy brethren here, their lives and thine
    Were not revenge sufficient for me;
    No, if I digg'd up thy forefathers' graves
    And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
    It could not slake mine ire nor ease my heart.
    The sight of any of the house of York
    Is as a fury to torment my soul;
    And till I root out their accursed line
    And leave not one alive, I live in hell.  
    Therefore-
  RUTLAND. O, let me pray before I take my death!
    To thee I pray: sweet Clifford, pity me.
  CLIFFORD. Such pity as my rapier's point affords.
  RUTLAND. I never did thee harm; why wilt thou slay me?
  CLIFFORD. Thy father hath.
  RUTLAND. But 'twas ere I was born.
    Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
    Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
    He be as miserably slain as I.
    Ah, let me live in prison all my days;
    And when I give occasion of offence
    Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.
  CLIFFORD. No cause!
    Thy father slew my father; therefore, die.       [Stabs him]
  RUTLAND. Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!         [Dies]
  CLIFFORD. Plantagenet, I come, Plantagenet;
    And this thy son's blood cleaving to my blade
    Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood,
    Congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.          Exit




SCENE IV.
Another part of the field

Alarum. Enter the DUKE OF YORK

  YORK. The army of the Queen hath got the field.
    My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
    And all my followers to the eager foe
    Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind,
    Or lambs pursu'd by hunger-starved wolves.
    My sons- God knows what hath bechanced them;
    But this I know- they have demean'd themselves
    Like men born to renown by life or death.
    Three times did Richard make a lane to me,
    And thrice cried 'Courage, father! fight it out.'
    And full as oft came Edward to my side
    With purple falchion, painted to the hilt
    In blood of those that had encount'red him.
    And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
    Richard cried 'Charge, and give no foot of ground!'
    And cried 'A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
    A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!'  
    With this we charg'd again; but out alas!
    We bodg'd again; as I have seen a swan
    With bootless labour swim against the tide
    And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
                                         [A short alarum within]
    Ah, hark! The fatal followers do pursue,
    And I am faint and cannot fly their fury;
    And were I strong, I would not shun their fury.
    The sands are numb'red that make up my life;
    Here must I stay, and here my life must end.

         Enter QUEEN MARGARET, CLIFFORD, NORTHUMBERLAND,
               the PRINCE OF WALES, and soldiers

    Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
    I dare your quenchless fury to more rage;
    I am your butt, and I abide your shot.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.
  CLIFFORD. Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm
    With downright payment show'd unto my father.  
    Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car,
    And made an evening at the noontide prick.
  YORK. My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth
    A bird that will revenge upon you all;
    And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
    Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
    Why come you not? What! multitudes, and fear?
  CLIFFORD. So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
    So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;
    So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
    Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.
  YORK. O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
    And in thy thought o'errun my former time;
    And, if thou canst for blushing, view this face,
    And bite thy tongue that slanders him with cowardice
    Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!
  CLIFFORD. I will not bandy with thee word for word,
    But buckler with thee blows, twice two for one.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Hold, valiant Clifford; for a thousand causes
    I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.  
    Wrath makes him deaf; speak thou, Northumberland.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much
    To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart.
    What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
    For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
    When he might spurn him with his foot away?
    It is war's prize to take all vantages;
    And ten to one is no impeach of valour.
                         [They lay hands on YORK, who struggles]
  CLIFFORD. Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. So doth the cony struggle in the net.
  YORK. So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty;
    So true men yield, with robbers so o'er-match'd.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. What would your Grace have done unto him now?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
    Come, make him stand upon this molehill here
    That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
    Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
    What, was it you that would be England's king?
    Was't you that revell'd in our parliament  
    And made a preachment of your high descent?
    Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
    The wanton Edward and the lusty George?
    And where's that valiant crook-back prodigy,
    Dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice
    Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
    Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
    Look, York: I stain'd this napkin with the blood
    That valiant Clifford with his rapier's point
    Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
    And if thine eyes can water for his death,
    I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
    Alas, poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
    I should lament thy miserable state.
    I prithee grieve to make me merry, York.
    What, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails
    That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
    Why art thou patient, man? Thou shouldst be mad;
    And I to make thee mad do mock thee thus.
    Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.  
    Thou wouldst be fee'd, I see, to make me sport;
    York cannot speak unless he wear a crown.
    A crown for York!-and, lords, bow low to him.
    Hold you his hands whilst I do set it on.
                             [Putting a paper crown on his head]
    Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king!
    Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair,
    And this is he was his adopted heir.
    But how is it that great Plantagenet
    Is crown'd so soon and broke his solemn oath?
    As I bethink me, you should not be King
    Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.
    And will you pale your head in Henry's glory,
    And rob his temples of the diadem,
    Now in his life, against your holy oath?
    O, 'tis a fault too too
    Off with the crown and with the crown his head;
    And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
  CLIFFORD. That is my office, for my father's sake.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Nay, stay; let's hear the orisons he makes.  
  YORK. She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France,
    Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!
    How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
    To triumph like an Amazonian trull
    Upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
    But that thy face is visard-like, unchanging,
    Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
    I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
    To tell thee whence thou cam'st, of whom deriv'd,
    Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
    Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
    Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem,
    Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
    Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
    It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen;
    Unless the adage must be verified,
    That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
    'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud;
    But, God He knows, thy share thereof is small.
    'Tis virtue that doth make them most admir'd;  
    The contrary doth make thee wond'red at.
    'Tis government that makes them seem divine;
    The want thereof makes thee abominable.
    Thou art as opposite to every good
    As the Antipodes are unto us,
    Or as the south to the septentrion.
    O tiger's heart wrapp'd in a woman's hide!
    How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
    To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
    And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
    Women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible:
    Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
    Bid'st thou me rage? Why, now thou hast thy wish;
    Wouldst have me weep? Why, now thou hast thy will;
    For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
    And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
    These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies;
    And every drop cries vengeance for his death
    'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false Frenchwoman.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Beshrew me, but his passions move me so  
    That hardly can I check my eyes from tears.
  YORK. That face of his the hungry cannibals
    Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood;
    But you are more inhuman, more inexorable-
    O, ten times more- than tigers of Hyrcania.
    See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears.
    This cloth thou dipp'dst in blood of my sweet boy,
    And I with tears do wash the blood away.
    Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this;
    And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
    Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears;
    Yea, even my foes will shed fast-falling tears
    And say 'Alas, it was a piteous deed!'
    There, take the crown, and with the crown my curse;
    And in thy need such comfort come to thee
    As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
    Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world;
    My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,
    I should not for my life but weep with him,  
    To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.
  QUEEN MARGARET. What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
    Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
    And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.
  CLIFFORD. Here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.
                                                  [Stabbing him]
  QUEEN MARGARET. And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.
                                                  [Stabbing him]
  YORK. Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God!
    My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.
                                                          [Dies]
  QUEEN MARGARET. Off with his head, and set it on York gates;
    So York may overlook the town of York.
                                                Flourish. Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.
A plain near Mortimer's Cross in Herefordshire

A march. Enter EDWARD, RICHARD, and their power

  EDWARD. I wonder how our princely father scap'd,
    Or whether he be scap'd away or no
    From Clifford's and Northumberland's pursuit.
    Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news;
    Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
    Or had he scap'd, methinks we should have heard
    The happy tidings of his good escape.
    How fares my brother? Why is he so sad?
  RICHARD. I cannot joy until I be resolv'd
    Where our right valiant father is become.
    I saw him in the battle range about,
    And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth.
    Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
    As doth a lion in a herd of neat;
    Or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs,
    Who having pinch'd a few and made them cry,
    The rest stand all aloof and bark at him.  
    So far'd our father with his enemies;
    So fled his enemies my warlike father.
    Methinks 'tis prize enough to be his son.
    See how the morning opes her golden gates
    And takes her farewell of the glorious sun.
    How well resembles it the prime of youth,
    Trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love!
  EDWARD. Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?
  RICHARD. Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun;
    Not separated with the racking clouds,
    But sever'd in a pale clear-shining sky.
    See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
    As if they vow'd some league inviolable.
    Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
    In this the heaven figures some event.
  EDWARD. 'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
    I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
    That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
    Each one already blazing by our meeds,
    Should notwithstanding join our lights together  
    And overshine the earth, as this the world.
    Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
    Upon my target three fair shining suns.
  RICHARD. Nay, bear three daughters- by your leave I speak it,
    You love the breeder better than the male.

                 Enter a MESSENGER, blowing

    But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
    Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?
  MESSENGER. Ah, one that was a woeful looker-on
    When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
    Your princely father and my loving lord!
  EDWARD. O, speak no more! for I have heard too much.
  RICHARD. Say how he died, for I will hear it all.
  MESSENGER. Environed he was with many foes,
    And stood against them as the hope of Troy
    Against the Greeks that would have ent'red Troy.
    But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
    And many strokes, though with a little axe,  
    Hews down and fells the hardest-timber'd oak.
    By many hands your father was subdu'd;
    But only slaught'red by the ireful arm
    Of unrelenting Clifford and the Queen,
    Who crown'd the gracious Duke in high despite,
    Laugh'd in his face; and when with grief he wept,
    The ruthless Queen gave him to dry his cheeks
    A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
    Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain;
    And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
    They took his head, and on the gates of York
    They set the same; and there it doth remain,
    The saddest spectacle that e'er I view'd.
  EDWARD. Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
    Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
    O Clifford, boist'rous Clifford, thou hast slain
    The flow'r of Europe for his chivalry;
    And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him,
    For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.
    Now my soul's palace is become a prison.  
    Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
    Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
    For never henceforth shall I joy again;
    Never, O never, shall I see more joy.
  RICHARD. I cannot weep, for all my body's moisture
    Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart;
    Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burden,
    For self-same wind that I should speak withal
    Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,
    And burns me up with flames that tears would quench.
    To weep is to make less the depth of grief.
    Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me!
    Richard, I bear thy name; I'll venge thy death,
    Or die renowned by attempting it.
  EDWARD. His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
    His dukedom and his chair with me is left.
  RICHARD. Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
    Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun;
    For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom, say:
    Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.  

         March. Enter WARWICK, MONTAGUE, and their army

  WARWICK. How now, fair lords! What fare? What news abroad?
  RICHARD. Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount
    Our baleful news and at each word's deliverance
    Stab poinards in our flesh till all were told,
    The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
    O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!
  EDWARD. O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet
    Which held thee dearly as his soul's redemption
    Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.
  WARWICK. Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears;
    And now, to add more measure to your woes,
    I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
    After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
    Where your brave father breath'd his latest gasp,
    Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
    Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
    I, then in London, keeper of the King,  
    Muster'd my soldiers, gathered flocks of friends,
    And very well appointed, as I thought,
    March'd toward Saint Albans to intercept the Queen,
    Bearing the King in my behalf along;
    For by my scouts I was advertised
    That she was coming with a full intent
    To dash our late decree in parliament
    Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.
    Short tale to make- we at Saint Albans met,
    Our battles join'd, and both sides fiercely fought;
    But whether 'twas the coldness of the King,
    Who look'd full gently on his warlike queen,
    That robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen,
    Or whether 'twas report of her success,
    Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigour,
    Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
    I cannot judge; but, to conclude with truth,
    Their weapons like to lightning came and went:
    Our soldiers', like the night-owl's lazy flight
    Or like an idle thresher with a flail,  
    Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
    I cheer'd them up with justice of our cause,
    With promise of high pay and great rewards,
    But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
    And we in them no hope to win the day;
    So that we fled: the King unto the Queen;
    Lord George your brother, Norfolk, and myself,
    In haste post-haste are come to join with you;
    For in the marches here we heard you were
    Making another head to fight again.
  EDWARD. Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
    And when came George from Burgundy to England?
  WARWICK. Some six miles off the Duke is with the soldiers;
    And for your brother, he was lately sent
    From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
    With aid of soldiers to this needful war.
  RICHARD. 'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled.
    Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
    But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.
  WARWICK. Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear;  
    For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
    Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head
    And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
    Were he as famous and as bold in war
    As he is fam'd for mildness, peace, and prayer.
  RICHARD. I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not.
    'Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.
    But in this troublous time what's to be done?
    Shall we go throw away our coats of steel
    And wrap our bodies in black mourning-gowns,
    Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
    Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
    Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
    If for the last, say 'Ay,' and to it, lords.
  WARWICK. Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out;
    And therefore comes my brother Montague.
    Attend me, lords. The proud insulting Queen,
    With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
    And of their feather many moe proud birds,
    Have wrought the easy-melting King like wax.  
    He swore consent to your succession,
    His oath enrolled in the parliament;
    And now to London all the crew are gone
    To frustrate both his oath and what beside
    May make against the house of Lancaster.
    Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong.
    Now if the help of Norfolk and myself,
    With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
    Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
    Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
    Why, Via! to London will we march amain,
    And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
    And once again cry 'Charge upon our foes!'
    But never once again turn back and fly.
  RICHARD. Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak.
    Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day
    That cries 'Retire!' if Warwick bid him stay.
  EDWARD. Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean;
    And when thou fail'st- as God forbid the hour!-
    Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend.  
  WARWICK. No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York;
    The next degree is England's royal throne,
    For King of England shalt thou be proclaim'd
    In every borough as we pass along;
    And he that throws not up his cap for joy
    Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
    King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
    Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,
    But sound the trumpets and about our task.
  RICHARD. Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
    As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
    I come to pierce it or to give thee mine.
  EDWARD. Then strike up drums. God and Saint George for us!

                       Enter a MESSENGER

  WARWICK. How now! what news?
  MESSENGER. The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me
    The Queen is coming with a puissant host,
    And craves your company for speedy counsel.  
  WARWICK. Why, then it sorts; brave warriors, let's away.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.
Before York

Flourish. Enter KING HENRY, QUEEN MARGARET, the PRINCE OF WALES, CLIFFORD,
NORTHUMBERLAND, with drum and trumpets

  QUEEN MARGARET. Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
    Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
    That sought to be encompass'd with your crown.
    Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
  KING HENRY. Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck-
    To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
    Withhold revenge, dear God; 'tis not my fault,
    Nor wittingly have I infring'd my vow.
  CLIFFORD. My gracious liege, this too much lenity
    And harmful pity must be laid aside.
    To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
    Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
    Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
    Not his that spoils her young before her face.
    Who scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?  
    Not he that sets his foot upon her back,
    The smallest worm will turn, being trodden on,
    And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
    Ambitious York did level at thy crown,
    Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows.
    He, but a Duke, would have his son a king,
    And raise his issue like a loving sire:
    Thou, being a king, bless'd with a goodly son,
    Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
    Which argued thee a most unloving father.
    Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
    And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
    Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
    Who hath not seen them- even with those wings
    Which sometime they have us'd with fearful flight-
    Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest,
    Offering their own lives in their young's defence
    For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
    Were it not pity that this goodly boy
    Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,  
    And long hereafter say unto his child
    'What my great-grandfather and grandsire got
    My careless father fondly gave away'?
    Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy;
    And let his manly face, which promiseth
    Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
    To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.
  KING HENRY. Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator,
    Inferring arguments of mighty force.
    But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
    That things ill got had ever bad success?
    And happy always was it for that son
    Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
    I'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind;
    And would my father had left me no more!
    For all the rest is held at such a rate
    As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep
    Than in possession any jot of pleasure.
    Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know
    How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!  
  QUEEN MARGARET. My lord, cheer up your spirits; our foes are nigh,
    And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
    You promis'd knighthood to our forward son:
    Unsheathe your sword and dub him presently.
    Edward, kneel down.
  KING HENRY. Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;
    And learn this lesson: Draw thy sword in right.
  PRINCE OF WALES. My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
    I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
    And in that quarrel use it to the death.
  CLIFFORD. Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.

                      Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. Royal commanders, be in readiness;
    For with a band of thirty thousand men
    Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York,
    And in the towns, as they do march along,
    Proclaims him king, and many fly to him.
    Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.  
  CLIFFORD. I would your Highness would depart the field:
    The Queen hath best success when you are absent.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.
  KING HENRY. Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Be it with resolution, then, to fight.
  PRINCE OF WALES. My royal father, cheer these noble lords,
    And hearten those that fight in your defence.
    Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry 'Saint George!'

         March. Enter EDWARD, GEORGE, RICHARD, WARWICK,
                NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, and soldiers

  EDWARD. Now, perjur'd Henry, wilt thou kneel for grace
    And set thy diadem upon my head,
    Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Go rate thy minions, proud insulting boy.
    Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
    Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?
  EDWARD. I am his king, and he should bow his knee.
    I was adopted heir by his consent:  
    Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
    You that are King, though he do wear the crown,
    Have caus'd him by new act of parliament
    To blot out me and put his own son in.
  CLIFFORD. And reason too:
    Who should succeed the father but the son?
  RICHARD. Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!
  CLIFFORD. Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,
    Or any he, the proudest of thy sort.
  RICHARD. 'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not?
  CLIFFORD. Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.
  RICHARD. For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.
  WARWICK. What say'st thou, Henry? Wilt thou yield the crown?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Why, how now, long-tongu'd Warwick! Dare you speak?
    When you and I met at Saint Albans last
    Your legs did better service than your hands.
  WARWICK. Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.
  CLIFFORD. You said so much before, and yet you fled.
  WARWICK. 'Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.  
  RICHARD. Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.
    Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain
    The execution of my big-swol'n heart
    Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.
  CLIFFORD. I slew thy father; call'st thou him a child?
  RICHARD. Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
    As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland;
    But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.
  KING HENRY. Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
  KING HENRY. I prithee give no limits to my tongue:
    I am a king, and privileg'd to speak.
  CLIFFORD. My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
    Cannot be cur'd by words; therefore be still.
  RICHARD. Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword.
    By Him that made us all, I am resolv'd
    That Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.
  EDWARD. Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
    A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day
    That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.  
  WARWICK. If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;
    For York in justice puts his armour on.
  PRINCE OF WALES. If that be right which Warwick says is right,
    There is no wrong, but every thing is right.
  RICHARD. Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;
    For well I wot thou hast thy mother's tongue.
  QUEEN MARGARET. But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;
    But like a foul misshapen stigmatic,
    Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,
    As venom toads or lizards' dreadful stings.
  RICHARD. Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,
    Whose father bears the title of a king-
    As if a channel should be call'd the sea-
    Sham'st thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
    To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?
  EDWARD. A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns
    To make this shameless callet know herself.
    Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
    Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
    And ne'er was Agamemmon's brother wrong'd  
    By that false woman as this king by thee.
    His father revell'd in the heart of France,
    And tam'd the King, and made the Dauphin stoop;
    And had he match'd according to his state,
    He might have kept that glory to this day;
    But when he took a beggar to his bed
    And grac'd thy poor sire with his bridal day,
    Even then that sunshine brew'd a show'r for him
    That wash'd his father's fortunes forth of France
    And heap'd sedition on his crown at home.
    For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride?
    Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept;
    And we, in pity of the gentle King,
    Had slipp'd our claim until another age.
  GEORGE. But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
    And that thy summer bred us no increase,
    We set the axe to thy usurping root;
    And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
    Yet know thou, since we have begun to strike,
    We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down,  
    Or bath'd thy growing with our heated bloods.
  EDWARD. And in this resolution I defy thee;
    Not willing any longer conference,
    Since thou deniest the gentle King to speak.
    Sound trumpets; let our bloody colours wave,
    And either victory or else a grave!
  QUEEN MARGARET. Stay, Edward.
  EDWARD. No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay;
    These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE III.
A field of battle between Towton and Saxton, in Yorkshire

Alarum; excursions. Enter WARWICK

  WARWICK. Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
    I lay me down a little while to breathe;
    For strokes receiv'd and many blows repaid
    Have robb'd my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
    And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile.

                     Enter EDWARD, running

  EDWARD. Smile, gentle heaven, or strike, ungentle death;
    For this world frowns, and Edward's sun is clouded.
  WARWICK. How now, my lord. What hap? What hope of good?

                         Enter GEORGE

  GEORGE. Our hap is lost, our hope but sad despair;
    Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us.  
    What counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?
  EDWARD. Bootless is flight: they follow us with wings;
    And weak we are, and cannot shun pursuit.

                         Enter RICHARD

  RICHARD. Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
    Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
    Broach'd with the steely point of Clifford's lance;
    And in the very pangs of death he cried,
    Like to a dismal clangor heard from far,
    'Warwick, revenge! Brother, revenge my death.'
    So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
    That stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
    The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.
  WARWICK. Then let the earth be drunken with our blood.
    I'll kill my horse, because I will not fly.
    Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
    Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage,
    And look upon, as if the tragedy  
    Were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors?
    Here on my knee I vow to God above
    I'll never pause again, never stand still,
    Till either death hath clos'd these eyes of mine
    Or fortune given me measure of revenge.
  EDWARD. O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine,
    And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
    And ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face
    I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to Thee,
    Thou setter-up and plucker-down of kings,
    Beseeching Thee, if with Thy will it stands
    That to my foes this body must be prey,
    Yet that Thy brazen gates of heaven may ope
    And give sweet passage to my sinful soul.
    Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
    Where'er it be, in heaven or in earth.
  RICHARD. Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,
    Let me embrace thee in my weary arms.
    I that did never weep now melt with woe
    That winter should cut off our spring-time so.  
  WARWICK. Away, away! Once more, sweet lords, farewell.
  GEORGE. Yet let us all together to our troops,
    And give them leave to fly that will not stay,
    And call them pillars that will stand to us;
    And if we thrive, promise them such rewards
    As victors wear at the Olympian games.
    This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
    For yet is hope of life and victory.
    Forslow no longer; make we hence amain.               Exeunt




SCENE IV.
Another part of the field

Excursions. Enter RICHARD and CLIFFORD

  RICHARD. Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone.
    Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
    And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,
    Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.
  CLIFFORD. Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone.
    This is the hand that stabbed thy father York;
    And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland;
    And here's the heart that triumphs in their death
    And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
    To execute the like upon thyself;
    And so, have at thee!                           [They fight]

                 Enter WARWICK; CLIFFORD flies

  RICHARD. Nay, Warwick, single out some other chase;
    For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.            Exeunt




SCENE V.
Another part of the field

Alarum. Enter KING HENRY alone

  KING HENRY. This battle fares like to the morning's war,
    When dying clouds contend with growing light,
    What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
    Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
    Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
    Forc'd by the tide to combat with the wind;
    Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
    Forc'd to retire by fury of the wind.
    Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
    Now one the better, then another best;
    Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
    Yet neither conqueror nor conquered.
    So is the equal poise of this fell war.
    Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
    To whom God will, there be the victory!
    For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
    Have chid me from the battle, swearing both  
    They prosper best of all when I am thence.
    Would I were dead, if God's good will were so!
    For what is in this world but grief and woe?
    O God! methinks it were a happy life
    To be no better than a homely swain;
    To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
    To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
    Thereby to see the minutes how they run-
    How many makes the hour full complete,
    How many hours brings about the day,
    How many days will finish up the year,
    How many years a mortal man may live.
    When this is known, then to divide the times-
    So many hours must I tend my flock;
    So many hours must I take my rest;
    So many hours must I contemplate;
    So many hours must I sport myself;
    So many days my ewes have been with young;
    So many weeks ere the poor fools will can;
    So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:  
    So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
    Pass'd over to the end they were created,
    Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
    Ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely!
    Gives not the hawthorn bush a sweeter shade
    To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
    Than doth a rich embroider'd canopy
    To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
    O yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth.
    And to conclude: the shepherd's homely curds,
    His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle,
    His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade,
    All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
    Is far beyond a prince's delicates-
    His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
    His body couched in a curious bed,
    When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.

       Alarum. Enter a son that hath kill'd his Father, at
       one door; and a FATHER that hath kill'd his Son, at  
                         another door

  SON. Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
    This man whom hand to hand I slew in fight
    May be possessed with some store of crowns;
    And I, that haply take them from him now,
    May yet ere night yield both my life and them
    To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
    Who's this? O God! It is my father's face,
    Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd.
    O heavy times, begetting such events!
    From London by the King was I press'd forth;
    My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
    Came on the part of York, press'd by his master;
    And I, who at his hands receiv'd my life,
    Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
    Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did.
    And pardon, father, for I knew not thee.
    My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks;
    And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.  
  KING HENRY. O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
    Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
    Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
    Weep, wretched man; I'll aid thee tear for tear;
    And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
    Be blind with tears and break o'ercharg'd with grief.

               Enter FATHER, bearing of his SON

  FATHER. Thou that so stoutly hath resisted me,
    Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold;
    For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
    But let me see. Is this our foeman's face?
    Ah, no, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
    Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
    Throw up thine eye! See, see what show'rs arise,
    Blown with the windy tempest of my heart
    Upon thy wounds, that kills mine eye and heart!
    O, pity, God, this miserable age!
    What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,  
    Erroneous, mutinous, and unnatural,
    This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
    O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
    And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!
  KING HENRY. Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!
    O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
    O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
    The red rose and the white are on his face,
    The fatal colours of our striving houses:
    The one his purple blood right well resembles;
    The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth.
    Wither one rose, and let the other flourish!
    If you contend, a thousand lives must perish.
  SON. How will my mother for a father's death
    Take on with me, and ne'er be satisfied!
  FATHER. How will my wife for slaughter of my son
    Shed seas of tears, and ne'er be satisfied!
  KING HENRY. How will the country for these woeful chances
    Misthink the King, and not be satisfied!
  SON. Was ever son so rued a father's death?  
  FATHER. Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?
  KING HENRY. Was ever king so griev'd for subjects' woe?
    Much is your sorrow; mine ten times so much.
  SON. I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.
                                              Exit with the body
  FATHER. These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
    My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
    For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go;
    My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
    And so obsequious will thy father be,
    Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
    As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
    I'll bear thee hence; and let them fight that will,
    For I have murdered where I should not kill.
                                              Exit with the body
  KING HENRY. Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
    Here sits a king more woeful than you are.

           Alarums, excursions. Enter QUEEN MARGARET,
                  PRINCE OF WALES, and EXETER  

  PRINCE OF WALES. Fly, father, fly; for all your friends are fled,
    And Warwick rages like a chafed bull.
    Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain.
    Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
    Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
    With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
    And bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands,
    Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.
  EXETER. Away! for vengeance comes along with them.
    Nay, stay not to expostulate; make speed;
    Or else come after. I'll away before.
  KING HENRY. Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter.
    Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
    Whither the Queen intends. Forward; away!             Exeunt




SCENE VI.
Another part of the field

A loud alarum. Enter CLIFFORD, wounded

  CLIFFORD. Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,
    Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
    O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
    More than my body's parting with my soul!
    My love and fear glu'd many friends to thee;
    And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts,
    Impairing Henry, strength'ning misproud York.
    The common people swarm like summer flies;
    And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
    And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
    O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
    That Phaethon should check thy fiery steeds,
    Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
    And, Henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do,
    Or as thy father and his father did,
    Giving no ground unto the house of York,
    They never then had sprung like summer flies;  
    I and ten thousand in this luckless realm
    Had left no mourning widows for our death;
    And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
    For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
    And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
    Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds.
    No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight.
    The foe is merciless and will not pity;
    For at their hands I have deserv'd no pity.
    The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
    And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
    Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest;
    I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms: split my breast.
                                                     [He faints]

       Alarum and retreat. Enter EDWARD, GEORGE, RICHARD
               MONTAGUE, WARWICK, and soldiers

  EDWARD. Now breathe we, lords. Good fortune bids us pause
    And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.  
    Some troops pursue the bloody-minded Queen
    That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
    As doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust,
    Command an argosy to stern the waves.
    But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?
  WARWICK. No, 'tis impossible he should escape;
    For, though before his face I speak the words,
    Your brother Richard mark'd him for the grave;
    And, whereso'er he is, he's surely dead.
                                     [CLIFFORD groans, and dies]
  RICHARD. Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
    A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.
    See who it is.
  EDWARD. And now the battle's ended,
    If friend or foe, let him be gently used.
  RICHARD. Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford;
    Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch
    In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
    But set his murd'ring knife unto the root
    From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring-  
    I mean our princely father, Duke of York.
  WARWICK. From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
    Your father's head, which Clifford placed there;
    Instead whereof let this supply the room.
    Measure for measure must be answered.
  EDWARD. Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,
    That nothing sung but death to us and ours.
    Now death shall stop his dismal threat'ning sound,
    And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.
  WARWICK. I think his understanding is bereft.
    Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
    Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
    And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.
  RICHARD. O, would he did! and so, perhaps, he doth.
    'Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
    Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
    Which in the time of death he gave our father.
  GEORGE. If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.
  RICHARD. Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.
  EDWARD. Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.  
  WARWICK. Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.
  GEORGE. While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.
  RICHARD. Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.
  EDWARD. Thou pitied'st Rutland, I will pity thee.
  GEORGE. Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?
  WARWICK. They mock thee, Clifford; swear as thou wast wont.
  RICHARD. What, not an oath? Nay, then the world goes hard
    When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
    I know by that he's dead; and by my soul,
    If this right hand would buy two hours' life,
    That I in all despite might rail at him,
    This hand should chop it off, and with the issuing blood
    Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
    York and young Rutland could not satisfy.
  WARWICK. Ay, but he's dead. Off with the traitor's head,
    And rear it in the place your father's stands.
    And now to London with triumphant march,
    There to be crowned England's royal King;
    From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
    And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen.  
    So shalt thou sinew both these lands together;
    And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
    The scatt'red foe that hopes to rise again;
    For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
    Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
    First will I see the coronation;
    And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea
    To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.
  EDWARD. Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
    For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
    And never will I undertake the thing
    Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
    Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester;
    And George, of Clarence; Warwick, as ourself,
    Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.
  RICHARD. Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester;
    For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.
  WARWICK. Tut, that's a foolish observation.
    Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London
    To see these honours in possession.                   Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
A chase in the north of England

Enter two KEEPERS, with cross-bows in their hands

  FIRST KEEPER. Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves,
    For through this laund anon the deer will come;
    And in this covert will we make our stand,
    Culling the principal of all the deer.
  SECOND KEEPER. I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.
  FIRST KEEPER. That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow
    Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
    Here stand we both, and aim we at the best;
    And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
    I'll tell thee what befell me on a day
    In this self-place where now we mean to stand.
  SECOND KEEPER. Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past.

        Enter KING HENRY, disguised, with a prayer-book

  KING HENRY. From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love,
    To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.  
    No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine;
    Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
    Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed.
    No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
    No humble suitors press to speak for right,
    No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
    For how can I help them and not myself?
  FIRST KEEPER. Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee.
    This is the quondam King; let's seize upon him.
  KING HENRY. Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
    For wise men say it is the wisest course.
  SECOND KEEPER. Why linger we? let us lay hands upon him.
  FIRST KEEPER. Forbear awhile; we'll hear a little more.
  KING HENRY. My Queen and son are gone to France for aid;
    And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
    Is thither gone to crave the French King's sister
    To wife for Edward. If this news be true,
    Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost;
    For Warwick is a subtle orator,
    And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.  
    By this account, then, Margaret may win him;
    For she's a woman to be pitied much.
    Her sighs will make a batt'ry in his breast;
    Her tears will pierce into a marble heart;
    The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn;
    And Nero will be tainted with remorse
    To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
    Ay, but she's come to beg: Warwick, to give.
    She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry:
    He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
    She weeps, and says her Henry is depos'd:
    He smiles, and says his Edward is install'd;
    That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more;
    Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
    Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
    And in conclusion wins the King from her
    With promise of his sister, and what else,
    To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
    O Margaret, thus 'twill be; and thou, poor soul,
    Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!  
  SECOND KEEPER. Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?
  KING HENRY. More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
    A man at least, for less I should not be;
    And men may talk of kings, and why not I?
  SECOND KEEPER. Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.
  KING HENRY. Why, so I am- in mind; and that's enough.
  SECOND KEEPER. But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?
  KING HENRY. My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
    Not deck'd with diamonds and Indian stones,
    Not to be seen. My crown is call'd content;
    A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.
  SECOND KEEPER. Well, if you be a king crown'd with content,
    Your crown content and you must be contented
    To go along with us; for as we think,
    You are the king King Edward hath depos'd;
    And we his subjects, sworn in all allegiance,
    Will apprehend you as his enemy.
  KING HENRY. But did you never swear, and break an oath?
  SECOND KEEPER. No, never such an oath; nor will not now.
  KING HENRY. Where did you dwell when I was King of England?  
  SECOND KEEPER. Here in this country, where we now remain.
  KING HENRY. I was anointed king at nine months old;
    My father and my grandfather were kings;
    And you were sworn true subjects unto me;
    And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
  FIRST KEEPER. No;
    For we were subjects but while you were king.
  KING HENRY. Why, am I dead? Do I not breathe a man?
    Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!
    Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
    And as the air blows it to me again,
    Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
    And yielding to another when it blows,
    Commanded always by the greater gust,
    Such is the lightness of you common men.
    But do not break your oaths; for of that sin
    My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
    Go where you will, the King shall be commanded;
    And be you kings: command, and I'll obey.
  FIRST KEEPER. We are true subjects to the King, King Edward.  
  KING HENRY. So would you be again to Henry,
    If he were seated as King Edward is.
  FIRST KEEPER. We charge you, in God's name and the King's,
    To go with us unto the officers.
  KING HENRY. In God's name, lead; your King's name be obey'd;
    And what God will, that let your King perform;
    And what he will, I humbly yield unto.                Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE II.
London. The palace

Enter KING EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and LADY GREY

  KING EDWARD. Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Albans' field
    This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
    His land then seiz'd on by the conqueror.
    Her suit is now to repossess those lands;
    Which we in justice cannot well deny,
    Because in quarrel of the house of York
    The worthy gentleman did lose his life.
  GLOUCESTER. Your Highness shall do well to grant her suit;
    It were dishonour to deny it her.
  KING EDWARD. It were no less; but yet I'll make a pause.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside to CLARENCE] Yea, is it so?
    I see the lady hath a thing to grant,
    Before the King will grant her humble suit.
  CLARENCE. [Aside to GLOUCESTER] He knows the game; how true he
    keeps the wind!
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside to CLARENCE] Silence!
  KING EDWARD. Widow, we will consider of your suit;  
    And come some other time to know our mind.
  LADY GREY. Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay.
    May it please your Highness to resolve me now;
    And what your pleasure is shall satisfy me.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] Ay, widow? Then I'll warrant you all your
      lands,
    An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.
    Fight closer or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.
  CLARENCE. [Aside to GLOUCESTER] I fear her not, unless she chance
    to fall.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside to CLARENCE] God forbid that, for he'll take
    vantages.
  KING EDWARD. How many children hast thou, widow, tell me.
  CLARENCE. [Aside to GLOUCESTER] I think he means to beg a child of
    her.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside to CLARENCE] Nay, then whip me; he'll rather
    give her two.
  LADY GREY. Three, my most gracious lord.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] You shall have four if you'll be rul'd by him.
  KING EDWARD. 'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.  
  LADY GREY. Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it, then.
  KING EDWARD. Lords, give us leave; I'll try this widow's wit.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] Ay, good leave have you; for you will have
      leave
    Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.
                              [GLOUCESTER and CLARENCE withdraw]
  KING EDWARD. Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?
  LADY GREY. Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.
  KING EDWARD. And would you not do much to do them good?
  LADY GREY. To do them good I would sustain some harm.
  KING EDWARD. Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.
  LADY GREY. Therefore I came unto your Majesty.
  KING EDWARD. I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.
  LADY GREY. So shall you bind me to your Highness' service.
  KING EDWARD. What service wilt thou do me if I give them?
  LADY GREY. What you command that rests in me to do.
  KING EDWARD. But you will take exceptions to my boon.
  LADY GREY. No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.
  KING EDWARD. Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.
  LADY GREY. Why, then I will do what your Grace commands.  
  GLOUCESTER. He plies her hard; and much rain wears the marble.
  CLARENCE. As red as fire! Nay, then her wax must melt.
  LADY GREY. Why stops my lord? Shall I not hear my task?
  KING EDWARD. An easy task; 'tis but to love a king.
  LADY GREY. That's soon perform'd, because I am a subject.
  KING EDWARD. Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.
  LADY GREY. I take my leave with many thousand thanks.
  GLOUCESTER. The match is made; she seals it with a curtsy.
  KING EDWARD. But stay thee- 'tis the fruits of love I mean.
  LADY GREY. The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.
  KING EDWARD. Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
    What love, thinkst thou, I sue so much to get?
  LADY GREY. My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
    That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.
  KING EDWARD. No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.
  LADY GREY. Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.
  KING EDWARD. But now you partly may perceive my mind.
  LADY GREY. My mind will never grant what I perceive
    Your Highness aims at, if I aim aright.
  KING EDWARD. To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.  
  LADY GREY. To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.
  KING EDWARD. Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.
  LADY GREY. Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower;
    For by that loss I will not purchase them.
  KING EDWARD. Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.
  LADY GREY. Herein your Highness wrongs both them and me.
    But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
    Accords not with the sadness of my suit.
    Please you dismiss me, either with ay or no.
  KING EDWARD. Ay, if thou wilt say ay to my request;
    No, if thou dost say no to my demand.
  LADY GREY. Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.
  GLOUCESTER. The widow likes him not; she knits her brows.
  CLARENCE. He is the bluntest wooer in Christendom.
  KING EDWARD. [Aside] Her looks doth argue her replete with modesty;
    Her words doth show her wit incomparable;
    All her perfections challenge sovereignty.
    One way or other, she is for a king;
    And she shall be my love, or else my queen.
    Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?  
  LADY GREY. 'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord.
    I am a subject fit to jest withal,
    But far unfit to be a sovereign.
  KING EDWARD. Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
    I speak no more than what my soul intends;
    And that is to enjoy thee for my love.
  LADY GREY. And that is more than I will yield unto.
    I know I am too mean to be your queen,
    And yet too good to be your concubine.
  KING EDWARD. You cavil, widow; I did mean my queen.
  LADY GREY. 'Twill grieve your Grace my sons should call you father.
  KING EDWARD.No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
    Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children;
    And, by God's Mother, I, being but a bachelor,
    Have other some. Why, 'tis a happy thing
    To be the father unto many sons.
    Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.
  GLOUCESTER. The ghostly father now hath done his shrift.
  CLARENCE. When he was made a shriver, 'twas for shrift.
  KING EDWARD. Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.  
  GLOUCESTER. The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
  KING EDWARD. You'd think it strange if I should marry her.
  CLARENCE. To who, my lord?
  KING EDWARD. Why, Clarence, to myself.
  GLOUCESTER. That would be ten days' wonder at the least.
  CLARENCE. That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
  GLOUCESTER. By so much is the wonder in extremes.
  KING EDWARD. Well, jest on, brothers; I can tell you both
    Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.

                       Enter a NOBLEMAN

  NOBLEMAN. My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken
    And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.
  KING EDWARD. See that he be convey'd unto the Tower.
    And go we, brothers, to the man that took him
    To question of his apprehension.
    Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.
                                       Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
  GLOUCESTER. Ay, Edward will use women honourably.  
    Would he were wasted, marrow, bones, and all,
    That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring
    To cross me from the golden time I look for!
    And yet, between my soul's desire and me-
    The lustful Edward's title buried-
    Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,
    And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies,
    To take their rooms ere I can place myself.
    A cold premeditation for my purpose!
    Why, then I do but dream on sovereignty;
    Like one that stands upon a promontory
    And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
    Wishing his foot were equal with his eye;
    And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
    Saying he'll lade it dry to have his way-
    So do I wish the crown, being so far off;
    And so I chide the means that keeps me from it;
    And so I say I'll cut the causes off,
    Flattering me with impossibilities.
    My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,  
    Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
    Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard;
    What other pleasure can the world afford?
    I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap,
    And deck my body in gay ornaments,
    And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
    O miserable thought! and more unlikely
    Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns.
    Why, love forswore me in my mother's womb;
    And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
    She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe
    To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub
    To make an envious mountain on my back,
    Where sits deformity to mock my body;
    To shape my legs of an unequal size;
    To disproportion me in every part,
    Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp
    That carries no impression like the dam.
    And am I, then, a man to be belov'd?
    O monstrous fault to harbour such a thought!  
    Then, since this earth affords no joy to me
    But to command, to check, to o'erbear such
    As are of better person than myself,
    I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
    And whiles I live t' account this world but hell,
    Until my misshap'd trunk that bear this head
    Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
    And yet I know not how to get the crown,
    For many lives stand between me and home;
    And I- like one lost in a thorny wood
    That rents the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
    Seeking a way and straying from the way
    Not knowing how to find the open air,
    But toiling desperately to find it out-
    Torment myself to catch the English crown;
    And from that torment I will free myself
    Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
    Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
    And cry 'Content!' to that which grieves my heart,
    And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,  
    And frame my face to all occasions.
    I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall;
    I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk;
    I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
    Deceive more slily than Ulysses could,
    And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
    I can add colours to the chameleon,
    Change shapes with Protheus for advantages,
    And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
    Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
    Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.           Exit




SCENE III.
France.  The KING'S palace

Flourish.  Enter LEWIS the French King, his sister BONA,
his Admiral call'd BOURBON; PRINCE EDWARD, QUEEN MARGARET,
and the EARL of OXFORD.  LEWIS sits, and riseth up again

  LEWIS. Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
    Sit down with us. It ill befits thy state
    And birth that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.
  QUEEN MARGARET. No, mighty King of France. Now Margaret
    Must strike her sail and learn a while to serve
    Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
    Great Albion's Queen in former golden days;
    But now mischance hath trod my title down
    And with dishonour laid me on the ground,
    Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,
    And to my humble seat conform myself.
  LEWIS. Why, say, fair Queen, whence springs this deep despair?
  QUEEN MARGARET. From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
    And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.  
  LEWIS. Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
    And sit thee by our side. [Seats her by him] Yield not thy neck
    To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
    Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
    Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief;
    It shall be eas'd, if France can yield relief.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
    And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
    Now therefore be it known to noble Lewis
    That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
    Is, of a king, become a banish'd man,
    And forc'd to live in Scotland a forlorn;
    While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York
    Usurps the regal title and the seat
    Of England's true-anointed lawful King.
    This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
    With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
    Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
    And if thou fail us, all our hope is done.
    Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help;  
    Our people and our peers are both misled,
    Our treasure seiz'd, our soldiers put to flight,
    And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.
  LEWIS. Renowned Queen, with patience calm the storm,
    While we bethink a means to break it off.
  QUEEN MARGARET. The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.
  LEWIS. The more I stay, the more I'll succour thee.
  QUEEN MARGARET. O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
    And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!

                        Enter WARWICK

  LEWIS. What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.
  LEWIS. Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?
                                      [He descends. She ariseth]
  QUEEN MARGARET. Ay, now begins a second storm to rise;
    For this is he that moves both wind and tide.
  WARWICK. From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
    My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,  
    I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,
    First to do greetings to thy royal person,
    And then to crave a league of amity,
    And lastly to confirm that amity
    With nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
    That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
    To England's King in lawful marriage.
  QUEEN MARGARET. [Aside] If that go forward, Henry's hope is done.
  WARWICK. [To BONA] And, gracious madam, in our king's behalf,
    I am commanded, with your leave and favour,
    Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue
    To tell the passion of my sovereign's heart;
    Where fame, late ent'ring at his heedful ears,
    Hath plac'd thy beauty's image and thy virtue.
  QUEEN MARGARET. King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak
    Before you answer Warwick. His demand
    Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
    But from deceit bred by necessity;
    For how can tyrants safely govern home
    Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?  
    To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
    That Henry liveth still; but were he dead,
    Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.
    Look therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
    Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour;
    For though usurpers sway the rule a while
    Yet heav'ns are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.
  WARWICK. Injurious Margaret!
  PRINCE OF WALES. And why not Queen?
  WARWICK. Because thy father Henry did usurp;
    And thou no more art prince than she is queen.
  OXFORD. Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
    Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
    And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
    Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
    And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
    Who by his prowess conquered all France.
    From these our Henry lineally descends.
  WARWICK. Oxford, how haps it in this smooth discourse
    You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost  
    All that which Henry the Fifth had gotten?
    Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
    But for the rest: you tell a pedigree
    Of threescore and two years- a silly time
    To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.
  OXFORD. Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
    Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
    And not betray thy treason with a blush?
  WARWICK. Can Oxford that did ever fence the right
    Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
    For shame! Leave Henry, and call Edward king.
  OXFORD. Call him my king by whose injurious doom
    My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
    Was done to death; and more than so, my father,
    Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years,
    When nature brought him to the door of death?
    No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm,
    This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.
  WARWICK. And I the house of York.
  LEWIS. Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,  
    Vouchsafe at our request to stand aside
    While I use further conference with Warwick.
                                              [They stand aloof]
  QUEEN MARGARET. Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not!
  LEWIS. Now, Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
    Is Edward your true king? for I were loath
    To link with him that were not lawful chosen.
  WARWICK. Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.
  LEWIS. But is he gracious in the people's eye?
  WARWICK. The more that Henry was unfortunate.
  LEWIS. Then further: all dissembling set aside,
    Tell me for truth the measure of his love
    Unto our sister Bona.
  WARWICK. Such it seems
    As may beseem a monarch like himself.
    Myself have often heard him say and swear
    That this his love was an eternal plant
    Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground,
    The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun,
    Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,  
    Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.
  LEWIS. Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.
  BONA. Your grant or your denial shall be mine.
    [To WARWICK] Yet I confess that often ere this day,
    When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
    Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.
  LEWIS. Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's.
    And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
    Touching the jointure that your king must make,
    Which with her dowry shall be counterpois'd.
    Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
    That Bona shall be wife to the English king.
  PRINCE OF WALES. To Edward, but not to the English king.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Deceitful Warwick, it was thy device
    By this alliance to make void my suit.
    Before thy coming, Lewis was Henry's friend.
  LEWIS. And still is friend to him and Margaret.
    But if your title to the crown be weak,
    As may appear by Edward's good success,
    Then 'tis but reason that I be releas'd  
    From giving aid which late I promised.
    Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
    That your estate requires and mine can yield.
  WARWICK. Henry now lives in Scotland at his case,
    Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
    And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
    You have a father able to maintain you,
    And better 'twere you troubled him than France.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick,
    Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
    I will not hence till with my talk and tears,
    Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
    Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love;
    For both of you are birds of self-same feather.
                                    [POST blowing a horn within]
  LEWIS. Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.

                       Enter the POST

  POST. My lord ambassador, these letters are for you,  
    Sent from your brother, Marquis Montague.
    These from our King unto your Majesty.
    And, madam, these for you; from whom I know not.
                                   [They all read their letters]
  OXFORD. I like it well that our fair Queen and mistress
    Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.
  PRINCE OF WALES. Nay, mark how Lewis stamps as he were nettled.
    I hope all's for the best.
  LEWIS. Warwick, what are thy news? And yours, fair Queen?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Mine such as fill my heart with unhop'd joys.
  WARWICK. Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.
  LEWIS. What, has your king married the Lady Grey?
    And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
    Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
    Is this th' alliance that he seeks with France?
    Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?
  QUEEN MARGARET. I told your Majesty as much before.
    This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.
  WARWICK. King Lewis, I here protest in sight of heaven,
    And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,  
    That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's-
    No more my king, for he dishonours me,
    But most himself, if he could see his shame.
    Did I forget that by the house of York
    My father came untimely to his death?
    Did I let pass th' abuse done to my niece?
    Did I impale him with the regal crown?
    Did I put Henry from his native right?
    And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?
    Shame on himself! for my desert is honour;
    And to repair my honour lost for him
    I here renounce him and return to Henry.
    My noble Queen, let former grudges pass,
    And henceforth I am thy true servitor.
    I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
    And replant Henry in his former state.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love;
    And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
    And joy that thou becom'st King Henry's friend.
  WARWICK. So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,  
    That if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
    With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
    I'll undertake to land them on our coast
    And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
    'Tis not his new-made bride shall succour him;
    And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
    He's very likely now to fall from him
    For matching more for wanton lust than honour
    Or than for strength and safety of our country.
  BONA. Dear brother, how shall Bona be reveng'd
    But by thy help to this distressed queen?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Renowned Prince, how shall poor Henry live
    Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?
  BONA. My quarrel and this English queen's are one.
  WARWICK. And mine, fair Lady Bona, joins with yours.
  LEWIS. And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret's.
    Therefore, at last, I firmly am resolv'd
    You shall have aid.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Let me give humble thanks for all at once.
  LEWIS. Then, England's messenger, return in post  
    And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
    That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
    To revel it with him and his new bride.
    Thou seest what's past; go fear thy king withal.
  BONA. Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
    I'll wear the willow-garland for his sake.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Tell him my mourning weeds are laid aside,
    And I am ready to put armour on.
  WARWICK. Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
    And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.
    There's thy reward; be gone.                       Exit POST
  LEWIS. But, Warwick,
    Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,
    Shall cross the seas and bid false Edward battle:
    And, as occasion serves, this noble Queen
    And Prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
    Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt:
    What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?
  WARWICK. This shall assure my constant loyalty:
    That if our Queen and this young Prince agree,  
    I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy
    To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
    Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,
    Therefore delay not- give thy hand to Warwick;
    And with thy hand thy faith irrevocable
    That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.
  PRINCE OF WALES. Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it;
    And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.
                                  [He gives his hand to WARWICK]
  LEWIS. stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied;
    And thou, Lord Bourbon, our High Admiral,
    Shall waft them over with our royal fleet.
    I long till Edward fall by war's mischance
    For mocking marriage with a dame of France.
                                          Exeunt all but WARWICK
  WARWICK. I came from Edward as ambassador,
    But I return his sworn and mortal foe.
    Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
    But dreadful war shall answer his demand.  
    Had he none else to make a stale but me?
    Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
    I was the chief that rais'd him to the crown,
    And I'll be chief to bring him down again;
    Not that I pity Henry's misery,
    But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.                   Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
London. The palace

Enter GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, SOMERSET, and MONTAGUE

  GLOUCESTER. Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
    Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
    Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?
  CLARENCE. Alas, you know 'tis far from hence to France!
    How could he stay till Warwick made return?
  SOMERSET. My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the King.

           Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD, attended; LADY
          GREY, as Queen; PEMBROKE, STAFFORD, HASTINGS,
      and others. Four stand on one side, and four on the other

  GLOUCESTER. And his well-chosen bride.
  CLARENCE. I mind to tell him plainly what I think.
  KING EDWARD. Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice
    That you stand pensive as half malcontent?
  CLARENCE. As well as Lewis of France or the Earl of Warwick,
    Which are so weak of courage and in judgment  
    That they'll take no offence at our abuse.
  KING EDWARD. Suppose they take offence without a cause;
    They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,
    Your King and Warwick's and must have my will.
  GLOUCESTER. And shall have your will, because our King.
    Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.
  KING EDWARD. Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?
  GLOUCESTER. Not I.
    No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd
    Whom God hath join'd together; ay, and 'twere pity
    To sunder them that yoke so well together.
  KING EDWARD. Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
    Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
    Should not become my wife and England's Queen.
    And you too, Somerset and Montague,
    Speak freely what you think.
  CLARENCE. Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
    Becomes your enemy for mocking him
    About the marriage of the Lady Bona.
  GLOUCESTER. And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,  
    Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.
  KING EDWARD. What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeas'd
    By such invention as I can devise?
  MONTAGUE. Yet to have join'd with France in such alliance
    Would more have strength'ned this our commonwealth
    'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.
  HASTINGS. Why, knows not Montague that of itself
    England is safe, if true within itself?
  MONTAGUE. But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.
  HASTINGS. 'Tis better using France than trusting France.
    Let us be back'd with God, and with the seas
    Which He hath giv'n for fence impregnable,
    And with their helps only defend ourselves.
    In them and in ourselves our safety lies.
  CLARENCE. For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
    To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.
  KING EDWARD. Ay, what of that? it was my will and grant;
    And for this once my will shall stand for law.
  GLOUCESTER. And yet methinks your Grace hath not done well
    To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales  
    Unto the brother of your loving bride.
    She better would have fitted me or Clarence;
    But in your bride you bury brotherhood.
  CLARENCE. Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
    Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
    And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
  KING EDWARD. Alas, poor Clarence! Is it for a wife
    That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.
  CLARENCE. In choosing for yourself you show'd your judgment,
    Which being shallow, you shall give me leave
    To play the broker in mine own behalf;
    And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.
  KING EDWARD. Leave me or tarry, Edward will be King,
    And not be tied unto his brother's will.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. My lords, before it pleas'd his Majesty
    To raise my state to title of a queen,
    Do me but right, and you must all confess
    That I was not ignoble of descent:
    And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
    But as this title honours me and mine,  
    So your dislikes, to whom I would be pleasing,
    Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.
  KING EDWARD. My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns.
    What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
    So long as Edward is thy constant friend
    And their true sovereign whom they must obey?
    Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
    Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
    Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
    And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.

                          Enter a POST

  KING EDWARD. Now, messenger, what letters or what news
    From France?
  MESSENGER. My sovereign liege, no letters, and few words,
    But such as I, without your special pardon,
    Dare not relate.
  KING EDWARD. Go to, we pardon thee; therefore, in brief,  
    Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
    What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?
  MESSENGER. At my depart, these were his very words:
    'Go tell false Edward, the supposed king,
    That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
    To revel it with him and his new bride.'
  KING EDWARD. IS Lewis so brave? Belike he thinks me Henry.
    But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?
  MESSENGER. These were her words, utt'red with mild disdain:
    'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
    I'll wear the willow-garland for his sake.'
  KING EDWARD. I blame not her: she could say little less;
    She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?
    For I have heard that she was there in place.
  MESSENGER. 'Tell him' quoth she 'my mourning weeds are done,
    And I am ready to put armour on.'
  KING EDWARD. Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
    But what said Warwick to these injuries?
  MESSENGER. He, more incens'd against your Majesty
    Than all the rest, discharg'd me with these words:  
    'Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong;
    And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.'
  KING EDWARD. Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
    Well, I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd.
    They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
    But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?
  MESSENGER. Ay, gracious sovereign; they are so link'd in friendship
    That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.
  CLARENCE. Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.
    Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
    For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter;
    That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
    I may not prove inferior to yourself.
    You that love me and Warwick, follow me.
                                      Exit, and SOMERSET follows
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] Not I.
    My thoughts aim at a further matter; I
    Stay not for the love of Edward but the crown.
  KING EDWARD. Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
    Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen;  
    And haste is needful in this desp'rate case.
    Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
    Go levy men and make prepare for war;
    They are already, or quickly will be landed.
    Myself in person will straight follow you.
                                    Exeunt PEMBROKE and STAFFORD
    But ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
    Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest,
    Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance.
    Tell me if you love Warwick more than me?
    If it be so, then both depart to him:
    I rather wish you foes than hollow friends.
    But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
    Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
    That I may never have you in suspect.
  MONTAGUE. So God help Montague as he proves true!
  HASTINGS. And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause!
  KING EDWARD. Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?
  GLOUCESTER. Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.
  KING EDWARD. Why, so! then am I sure of victory.  
    Now therefore let us hence, and lose no hour
    Till we meet Warwick with his foreign pow'r.          Exeunt




SCENE II.
A plain in Warwickshire

Enter WARWICK and OXFORD, with French soldiers

  WARWICK. Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well;
    The common people by numbers swarm to us.

                 Enter CLARENCE and SOMERSET

    But see where Somerset and Clarence comes.
    Speak suddenly, my lords- are we all friends?
  CLARENCE. Fear not that, my lord.
  WARWICK. Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick;
    And welcome, Somerset. I hold it cowardice
    To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
    Hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love;
    Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
    Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings.
    But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be thine.
    And now what rests but, in night's coverture,
    Thy brother being carelessly encamp'd,  
    His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
    And but attended by a simple guard,
    We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
    Our scouts have found the adventure very easy;
    That as Ulysses and stout Diomede
    With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents,
    And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
    So we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle,
    At unawares may beat down Edward's guard
    And seize himself- I say not 'slaughter him,'
    For I intend but only to surprise him.
    You that will follow me to this attempt,
    Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
                                         [They all cry 'Henry!']
    Why then, let's on our way in silent sort.
    For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!    Exeunt



SCENE III.
Edward's camp, near Warwick

Enter three WATCHMEN, to guard the KING'S tent

  FIRST WATCHMAN. Come on, my masters, each man take his stand;
    The King by this is set him down to sleep.
  SECOND WATCHMAN. What, will he not to bed?
  FIRST WATCHMAN. Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vow
    Never to lie and take his natural rest
    Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.
  SECOND WATCHMAN. To-morrow then, belike, shall be the day,
    If Warwick be so near as men report.
  THIRD WATCHMAN. But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
    That with the King here resteth in his tent?
  FIRST WATCHMAN. 'Tis the Lord Hastings, the King's chiefest friend.
  THIRD WATCHMAN. O, is it So? But why commands the King
    That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
    While he himself keeps in the cold field?
  SECOND WATCHMAN. 'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.
  THIRD WATCHMAN. Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
    I like it better than dangerous honour.  
    If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
    'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.
  FIRST WATCHMAN. Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.
  SECOND WATCHMAN. Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent
    But to defend his person from night-foes?

             Enter WARWICK, CLARENCE, OXFORD, SOMERSET,
                   and French soldiers, silent all

  WARWICK. This is his tent; and see where stand his guard.
    Courage, my masters! Honour now or never!
    But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.
  FIRST WATCHMAN. Who goes there?
  SECOND WATCHMAN. Stay, or thou diest.

       WARWICK and the rest cry all 'Warwick! Warwick!' and
      set upon the guard, who fly, crying 'Arm! Arm!' WARWICK
                   and the rest following them

      The drum playing and trumpet sounding, re-enter WARWICK  
         and the rest, bringing the KING out in his gown,
   sitting in a chair. GLOUCESTER and HASTINGS fly over the stage

  SOMERSET. What are they that fly there?
  WARWICK. Richard and Hastings. Let them go; here is the Duke.
  KING EDWARD. The Duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,
    Thou call'dst me King?
  WARWICK. Ay, but the case is alter'd.
    When you disgrac'd me in my embassade,
    Then I degraded you from being King,
    And come now to create you Duke of York.
    Alas, how should you govern any kingdom
    That know not how to use ambassadors,
    Nor how to be contented with one wife,
    Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
    Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
    Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?
  KING EDWARD. Yea, brother of Clarence, art thou here too?
    Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
    Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,  
    Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
    Edward will always bear himself as King.
    Though fortune's malice overthrow my state,
    My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.
  WARWICK. Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king;
                                           [Takes off his crown]
    But Henry now shall wear the English crown
    And be true King indeed; thou but the shadow.
    My Lord of Somerset, at my request,
    See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd
    Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
    When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
    I'll follow you and tell what answer
    Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
    Now for a while farewell, good Duke of York.
  KING EDWARD. What fates impose, that men must needs abide;
    It boots not to resist both wind and tide.
                                    [They lead him out forcibly]
  OXFORD. What now remains, my lords, for us to do
    But march to London with our soldiers?  
  WARWICK. Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do;
    To free King Henry from imprisonment,
    And see him seated in the regal throne.               Exeunt




SCENE IV.
London. The palace

Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and RIVERS

  RIVERS. Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Why, brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
    What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?
  RIVERS. What, loss of some pitch'd battle against Warwick?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. No, but the loss of his own royal person.
  RIVERS. Then is my sovereign slain?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner;
    Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard
    Or by his foe surpris'd at unawares;
    And, as I further have to understand,
    Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
    Fell Warwick's brother, and by that our foe.
  RIVERS. These news, I must confess, are full of grief;
    Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may:
    Warwick may lose that now hath won the day.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Till then, fair hope must hinder life's decay.
    And I the rather wean me from despair  
    For love of Edward's offspring in my womb.
    This is it that makes me bridle passion
    And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross;
    Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
    And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
    Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
    King Edward's fruit, true heir to th' English crown.
  RIVERS. But, madam, where is Warwick then become?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. I am inform'd that he comes towards London
    To set the crown once more on Henry's head.
    Guess thou the rest: King Edward's friends must down.
    But to prevent the tyrant's violence-
    For trust not him that hath once broken faith-
    I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary
    To save at least the heir of Edward's right.
    There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
    Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly:
    If Warwick take us, we are sure to die.               Exeunt




SCENE V.
A park near Middleham Castle in Yorkshire

Enter GLOUCESTER, LORD HASTINGS, SIR WILLIAM STANLEY, and others

  GLOUCESTER. Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
    Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither
    Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
    Thus stands the case: you know our King, my brother,
    Is prisoner to the Bishop here, at whose hands
    He hath good usage and great liberty;
    And often but attended with weak guard
    Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
    I have advertis'd him by secret means
    That if about this hour he make this way,
    Under the colour of his usual game,
    He shall here find his friends, with horse and men,
    To set him free from his captivity.

             Enter KING EDWARD and a HUNTSMAN with him
  
  HUNTSMAN. This way, my lord; for this way lies the game.
  KING EDWARD. Nay, this way, man. See where the huntsmen stand.
    Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
    Stand you thus close to steal the Bishop's deer?
  GLOUCESTER. Brother, the time and case requireth haste;
    Your horse stands ready at the park corner.
  KING EDWARD. But whither shall we then?
  HASTINGS. To Lynn, my lord; and shipt from thence to Flanders.
  GLOUCESTER. Well guess'd, believe me; for that was my meaning.
  KING EDWARD. Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.
  GLOUCESTER. But wherefore stay we? 'Tis no time to talk.
  KING EDWARD. Huntsman, what say'st thou? Wilt thou go along?
  HUNTSMAN. Better do so than tarry and be hang'd.
  GLOUCESTER. Come then, away; let's ha' no more ado.
  KING EDWARD. Bishop, farewell. Shield thee from Warwick's frown,
    And pray that I may repossess the crown.              Exeunt




SCENE VI.
London. The Tower

Flourish. Enter KING HENRY, CLARENCE, WARWICK, SOMERSET, young HENRY,
EARL OF RICHMOND, OXFORD, MONTAGUE, LIEUTENANT OF THE TOWER, and attendants

  KING HENRY. Master Lieutenant, now that God and friends
    Have shaken Edward from the regal seat
    And turn'd my captive state to liberty,
    My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
    At our enlargement what are thy due fees?
  LIEUTENANT. Subjects may challenge nothing of their sov'reigns;
    But if an humble prayer may prevail,
    I then crave pardon of your Majesty.
  KING HENRY. For what, Lieutenant? For well using me?
    Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness,
    For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure;
    Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds
    Conceive when, after many moody thoughts,
    At last by notes of household harmony
    They quite forget their loss of liberty.  
    But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free,
    And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee;
    He was the author, thou the instrument.
    Therefore, that I may conquer fortune's spite
    By living low where fortune cannot hurt me,
    And that the people of this blessed land
    May not be punish'd with my thwarting stars,
    Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
    I here resign my government to thee,
    For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.
  WARWICK. Your Grace hath still been fam'd for virtuous,
    And now may seem as wise as virtuous
    By spying and avoiding fortune's malice,
    For few men rightly temper with the stars;
    Yet in this one thing let me blame your Grace,
    For choosing me when Clarence is in place.
  CLARENCE. No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
    To whom the heav'ns in thy nativity
    Adjudg'd an olive branch and laurel crown,
    As likely to be blest in peace and war;  
    And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
  WARWICK. And I choose Clarence only for Protector.
  KING HENRY. Warwick and Clarence, give me both your hands.
    Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
    That no dissension hinder government.
    I make you both Protectors of this land,
    While I myself will lead a private life
    And in devotion spend my latter days,
    To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.
  WARWICK. What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?
  CLARENCE. That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
    For on thy fortune I repose myself.
  WARWICK. Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content.
    We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
    To Henry's body, and supply his place;
    I mean, in bearing weight of government,
    While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
    And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
    Forthwith that Edward be pronounc'd a traitor,
    And all his lands and goods confiscated.  
  CLARENCE. What else? And that succession be determin'd.
  WARWICK. Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
  KING HENRY. But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
    Let me entreat- for I command no more-
    That Margaret your Queen and my son Edward
    Be sent for to return from France with speed;
    For till I see them here, by doubtful fear
    My joy of liberty is half eclips'd.
  CLARENCE. It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
  KING HENRY. My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,
    Of whom you seem to have so tender care?
  SOMERSET. My liege, it is young Henry, Earl of Richmond.
  KING HENRY. Come hither, England's hope.
                                     [Lays his hand on his head]
    If secret powers
    Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
    This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
    His looks are full of peaceful majesty;
    His head by nature fram'd to wear a crown,
    His hand to wield a sceptre; and himself  
    Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
    Make much of him, my lords; for this is he
    Must help you more than you are hurt by me.

                          Enter a POST

  WARWICK. What news, my friend?
  POST. That Edward is escaped from your brother
    And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.
  WARWICK. Unsavoury news! But how made he escape?
  POST. He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester
    And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
    In secret ambush on the forest side
    And from the Bishop's huntsmen rescu'd him;
    For hunting was his daily exercise.
  WARWICK. My brother was too careless of his charge.
    But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
    A salve for any sore that may betide.
                   Exeunt all but SOMERSET, RICHMOND, and OXFORD
  SOMERSET. My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's;  
    For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
    And we shall have more wars befor't be long.
    As Henry's late presaging prophecy
    Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
    So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts,
    What may befall him to his harm and ours.
    Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
    Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
    Till storms be past of civil enmity.
  OXFORD. Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
    'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.
  SOMERSET. It shall be so; he shall to Brittany.
    Come therefore, let's about it speedily.              Exeunt




SCENE VII.
Before York

Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and soldiers

  KING EDWARD. Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
    Yet thus far fortune maketh us amends,
    And says that once more I shall interchange
    My waned state for Henry's regal crown.
    Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas,
    And brought desired help from Burgundy;
    What then remains, we being thus arriv'd
    From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
    But that we enter, as into our dukedom?
  GLOUCESTER. The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;
    For many men that stumble at the threshold
    Are well foretold that danger lurks within.
  KING EDWARD. Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us.
    By fair or foul means we must enter in,
    For hither will our friends repair to us.
  HASTINGS. My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.  

         Enter, on the walls, the MAYOR OF YORK and
                       his BRETHREN

  MAYOR. My lords, we were forewarned of your coming
    And shut the gates for safety of ourselves,
    For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.
  KING EDWARD. But, Master Mayor, if Henry be your King,
    Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.
  MAYOR. True, my good lord; I know you for no less.
  KING EDWARD. Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
    As being well content with that alone.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
    He'll soon find means to make the body follow.
  HASTINGS. Why, Master Mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
    Open the gates; we are King Henry's friends.
  MAYOR. Ay, say you so? The gates shall then be open'd.
                                                   [He descends]
  GLOUCESTER. A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!
  HASTINGS. The good old man would fain that all were well,  
    So 'twere not long of him; but being ent'red,
    I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
    Both him and all his brothers unto reason.

             Enter, below, the MAYOR and two ALDERMEN

  KING EDWARD. So, Master Mayor. These gates must not be shut
    But in the night or in the time of war.
    What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;
                                                [Takes his keys]
    For Edward will defend the town and thee,
    And all those friends that deign to follow me.

           March. Enter MONTGOMERY with drum and soldiers

  GLOUCESTER. Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
    Our trusty friend, unless I be deceiv'd.
  KING EDWARD. Welcome, Sir john! But why come you in arms?
  MONTGOMERY. To help King Edward in his time of storm,
    As every loyal subject ought to do.  
  KING EDWARD. Thanks, good Montgomery; but we now forget
    Our title to the crown, and only claim
    Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.
  MONTGOMERY. Then fare you well, for I will hence again.
    I came to serve a king and not a duke.
    Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.
                                      [The drum begins to march]
  KING EDWARD. Nay, stay, Sir John, a while, and we'll debate
    By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.
  MONTGOMERY. What talk you of debating? In few words:
    If you'll not here proclaim yourself our King,
    I'll leave you to your fortune and be gone
    To keep them back that come to succour you.
    Why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?
  GLOUCESTER. Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
  KING EDWARD. When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim;
    Till then 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.
  HASTINGS. Away with scrupulous wit! Now arms must rule.
  GLOUCESTER. And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
    Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand;  
    The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.
  KING EDWARD. Then be it as you will; for 'tis my right,
    And Henry but usurps the diadem.
  MONTGOMERY. Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself;
    And now will I be Edward's champion.
  HASTINGS. Sound trumpet; Edward shall be here proclaim'd.
    Come, fellow soldier, make thou proclamation.
                                   [Gives him a paper. Flourish]
  SOLDIER. [Reads] 'Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God,
    King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, &c.'
  MONTGOMERY. And whoso'er gainsays King Edward's right,
    By this I challenge him to single fight.
                                          [Throws down gauntlet]
  ALL. Long live Edward the Fourth!
  KING EDWARD. Thanks, brave Montgomery, and thanks unto you all;
    If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.
    Now for this night let's harbour here in York;
    And when the morning sun shall raise his car
    Above the border of this horizon,
    We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates;  
    For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
    Ah, froward Clarence, how evil it beseems the
    To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
    Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
    Come on, brave soldiers; doubt not of the day,
    And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.        Exeunt




SCENE VIII.
London. The palace

Flourish. Enter KING HENRY, WARWICK, MONTAGUE, CLARENCE, OXFORD, and EXETER

  WARWICK. What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
    With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
    Hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas
    And with his troops doth march amain to London;
    And many giddy people flock to him.
  KING HENRY. Let's levy men and beat him back again.
  CLARENCE. A little fire is quickly trodden out,
    Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.
  WARWICK. In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
    Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war;
    Those will I muster up, and thou, son Clarence,
    Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
    The knights and gentlemen to come with thee.
    Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
    Northampton, and in Leicestershire, shalt find
    Men well inclin'd to hear what thou command'st.  
    And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well belov'd,
    In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
    My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
    Like to his island girt in with the ocean
    Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
    Shall rest in London till we come to him.
    Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
    Farewell, my sovereign.
  KING HENRY. Farewell, my Hector and my Troy's true hope.
  CLARENCE. In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness' hand.
  KING HENRY. Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate!
  MONTAGUE. Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.
  OXFORD. [Kissing the KING'S band] And thus I seal my truth and bid
    adieu.
  KING HENRY. Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,
    And all at once, once more a happy farewell.
  WARWICK. Farewell, sweet lords; let's meet at Coventry.
                              Exeunt all but the KING and EXETER
  KING HENRY. Here at the palace will I rest a while.
    Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?  
    Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
    Should not be able to encounter mine.
  EXETER. The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
  KING HENRY. That's not my fear; my meed hath got me fame:
    I have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands,
    Nor posted off their suits with slow delays;
    My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
    My mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs,
    My mercy dried their water-flowing tears;
    I have not been desirous of their wealth,
    Nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies,
    Nor forward of revenge, though they much err'd.
    Then why should they love Edward more than me?
    No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace;
    And, when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
    The lamb will never cease to follow him.
                      [Shout within 'A Lancaster! A Lancaster!']
  EXETER. Hark, hark, my lord! What shouts are these?

            Enter KING EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers  

  KING EDWARD. Seize on the shame-fac'd Henry, bear him hence;
    And once again proclaim us King of England.
    You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow.
    Now stops thy spring; my sea shall suck them dry,
    And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
    Hence with him to the Tower: let him not speak.
                                     Exeunt some with KING HENRY
    And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course,
    Where peremptory Warwick now remains.
    The sun shines hot; and, if we use delay,
    Cold biting winter mars our hop'd-for hay.
  GLOUCESTER. Away betimes, before his forces join,
    And take the great-grown traitor unawares.
    Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
Coventry

Enter WARWICK, the MAYOR OF COVENTRY, two MESSENGERS,
and others upon the walls

  WARWICK. Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
    How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?
  FIRST MESSENGER. By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
  WARWICK. How far off is our brother Montague?
    Where is the post that came from Montague?
  SECOND MESSENGER. By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.

                   Enter SIR JOHN SOMERVILLE

  WARWICK. Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
    And by thy guess how nigh is Clarence now?
  SOMERVILLE. At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
    And do expect him here some two hours hence.
                                                    [Drum heard]
  WARWICK. Then Clarence is at hand; I hear his drum.
  SOMERVILLE. It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies.  
    The drum your Honour hears marcheth from Warwick.
  WARWICK. Who should that be? Belike unlook'd for friends.
  SOMERVILLE. They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.

        March. Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD, GLOUCESTER,
                         and soldiers

  KING EDWARD. Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.
  GLOUCESTER. See how the surly Warwick mans the wall.
  WARWICK. O unbid spite! Is sportful Edward come?
    Where slept our scouts or how are they seduc'd
    That we could hear no news of his repair?
  KING EDWARD. Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
    Speak gentle words, and humbly bend thy knee,
    Call Edward King, and at his hands beg mercy?
    And he shall pardon thee these outrages.
  WARWICK. Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
    Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee down,
    Call Warwick patron, and be penitent?
    And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.  
  GLOUCESTER. I thought, at least, he would have said the King;
    Or did he make the jest against his will?
  WARWICK. Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?
  GLOUCESTER. Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give.
    I'll do thee service for so good a gift.
  WARWICK. 'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.
  KING EDWARD. Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.
  WARWICK. Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight;
    And, weakling, Warwick takes his gift again;
    And Henry is my King, Warwick his subject.
  KING EDWARD. But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner.
    And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
    What is the body when the head is off?
  GLOUCESTER. Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
    But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
    The king was slily finger'd from the deck!
    You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
    And ten to one you'll meet him in the Tower.
  KING EDWARD. 'Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.
  GLOUCESTER. Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel down.  
    Nay, when? Strike now, or else the iron cools.
  WARWICK. I had rather chop this hand off at a blow,
    And with the other fling it at thy face,
    Than bear so low a sail to strike to thee.
  KING EDWARD. Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
    This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair,
    Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
    Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood:
    'Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.'

               Enter OXFORD, with drum and colours

  WARWICK. O cheerful colours! See where Oxford comes.
  OXFORD. Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
  GLOUCESTER. The gates are open, let us enter too.
  KING EDWARD. So other foes may set upon our backs.
    Stand we in good array, for they no doubt
    Will issue out again and bid us battle;
    If not, the city being but of small defence,  
    We'll quietly rouse the traitors in the same.
  WARWICK. O, welcome, Oxford! for we want thy help.

             Enter MONTAGUE, with drum and colours

  MONTAGUE. Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
  GLOUCESTER. Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
    Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.
  KING EDWARD. The harder match'd, the greater victory.
    My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.

             Enter SOMERSET, with drum and colours

  SOMERSET. Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
  GLOUCESTER. Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,
    Have sold their lives unto the house of York;
    And thou shalt be the third, if this sword hold.
  
             Enter CLARENCE, with drum and colours

  WARWICK. And lo where George of Clarence sweeps along,
    Of force enough to bid his brother battle;
    With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
    More than the nature of a brother's love.
  CLARENCE. Clarence, Clarence, for Lancaster!
  KING EDWARD. Et tu Brute- wilt thou stab Caesar too?
    A parley, sirrah, to George of Clarence.
                  [Sound a parley. RICHARD and CLARENCE whisper]
  WARWICK. Come, Clarence, come. Thou wilt if Warwick call.
  CLARENCE. [Taking the red rose from his hat and throwing
      it at WARWICK]
    Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
    Look here, I throw my infamy at thee.
    I will not ruinate my father's house,
    Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
    And set up Lancaster. Why, trowest thou, Warwick,
    That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
    To bend the fatal instruments of war  
    Against his brother and his lawful King?
    Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath.
    To keep that oath were more impiety
    Than Jephtha when he sacrific'd his daughter.
    I am so sorry for my trespass made
    That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
    I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe;
    With resolution whereso'er I meet thee-
    As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad-
    To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
    And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
    And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
    Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends;
    And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
    For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.
  KING EDWARD. Now welcome more, and ten times more belov'd,
    Than if thou never hadst deserv'd our hate.
  GLOUCESTER. Welcome, good Clarence; this is brother-like.
  WARWICK. O passing traitor, perjur'd and unjust!
  KING EDWARD. What, Warwick, wilt thou leave die town and fight?  
    Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?
  WARWICK. Alas, I am not coop'd here for defence!
    I will away towards Barnet presently
    And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou dar'st.
  KING EDWARD. Yes, Warwick, Edward dares and leads the way.
    Lords, to the field; Saint George and victory!
                                                 Exeunt YORKISTS
                         [March. WARWICK and his company follow]




SCENE II.
A field of battle near Barnet

Alarum and excursions. Enter KING EDWARD, bringing forth WARWICK, wounded

  KING EDWARD. So, lie thou there. Die thou, and die our fear;
    For Warwick was a bug that fear'd us all.
    Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,
    That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.            Exit
  WARWICK. Ah, who is nigh? Come to me, friend or foe,
    And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
    Why ask I that? My mangled body shows,
    My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows,
    That I must yield my body to the earth
    And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
    Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
    Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
    Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
    Whose top-branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading tree
    And kept low shrubs from winter's pow'rful wind.
    These eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil,  
    Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun
    To search the secret treasons of the world;
    The wrinkles in my brows, now fill'd with blood,
    Were lik'ned oft to kingly sepulchres;
    For who liv'd King, but I could dig his grave?
    And who durst smile when Warwick bent his brow?
    Lo now my glory smear'd in dust and blood!
    My parks, my walks, my manors, that I had,
    Even now forsake me; and of all my lands
    Is nothing left me but my body's length.
    what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
    And live we how we can, yet die we must.

                  Enter OXFORD and SOMERSET

  SOMERSET. Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wert thou as we are,
    We might recover all our loss again.
    The Queen from France hath brought a puissant power;
    Even now we heard the news. Ah, couldst thou fly!
  WARWICK. Why then, I would not fly. Ah, Montague,  
    If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand,
    And with thy lips keep in my soul a while!
    Thou lov'st me not; for, brother, if thou didst,
    Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
    That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
    Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.
  SOMERSET. Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breath'd his last;
    And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
    And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.'
    And more he would have said; and more he spoke,
    Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
    That mought not be distinguish'd; but at last,
    I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
    'O farewell, Warwick!'
  WARWICK. Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves:
    For Warwick bids you all farewell, to meet in heaven.
                                                          [Dies]
  OXFORD. Away, away, to meet the Queen's great power!
                                  [Here they bear away his body]




SCENE III.
Another part of the field

Flourish. Enter KING in triumph; with GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and the rest

  KING EDWARD. Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
    And we are grac'd with wreaths of victory.
    But in the midst of this bright-shining day
    I spy a black, suspicious, threat'ning cloud
    That will encounter with our glorious sun
    Ere he attain his easeful western bed-
    I mean, my lords, those powers that the Queen
    Hath rais'd in Gallia have arriv'd our coast
    And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.
  CLARENCE. A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
    And blow it to the source from whence it came;
    Thy very beams will dry those vapours up,
    For every cloud engenders not a storm.
  GLOUCESTER. The Queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
    And Somerset, with Oxford, fled to her.
    If she have time to breathe, be well assur'd  
    Her faction will be full as strong as ours.
  KING EDWARD. are advertis'd by our loving friends
    That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury;
    We, having now the best at Barnet field,
    Will thither straight, for willingness rids way;
    And as we march our strength will be augmented
    In every county as we go along.
    Strike up the drum; cry 'Courage!' and away.          Exeunt




SCENE IV.
Plains wear Tewksbury

Flourish. March. Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, SOMERSET, OXFORD,
and SOLDIERS

  QUEEN MARGARET. Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their
      loss,
    But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
    What though the mast be now blown overboard,
    The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
    And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood;
    Yet lives our pilot still. Is't meet that he
    Should leave the helm and, like a fearful lad,
    With tearful eyes add water to the sea
    And give more strength to that which hath too much;
    Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
    Which industry and courage might have sav'd?
    Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!
    Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
    And Montague our top-mast; what of him?
    Our slaught'red friends the tackles; what of these?  
    Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
    And Somerset another goodly mast?
    The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
    And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
    For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
    We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
    But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
    From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck,
    As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
    And what is Edward but a ruthless sea?
    What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
    And Richard but a ragged fatal rock?
    All these the enemies to our poor bark.
    Say you can swim; alas, 'tis but a while!
    Tread on the sand; why, there you quickly sink.
    Bestride the rock; the tide will wash you off,
    Or else you famish- that's a threefold death.
    This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
    If case some one of you would fly from us,
    That there's no hop'd-for mercy with the brothers  
    More than with ruthless waves, with sands, and rocks.
    Why, courage then! What cannot be avoided
    'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.
  PRINCE OF WALES. Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
    Should, if a coward hear her speak these words,
    Infuse his breast with magnanimity
    And make him naked foil a man-at-arms.
    I speak not this as doubting any here;
    For did I but suspect a fearful man,
    He should have leave to go away betimes,
    Lest in our need he might infect another
    And make him of the like spirit to himself.
    If any such be here- as God forbid!-
    Let him depart before we need his help.
  OXFORD. Women and children of so high a courage,
    And warriors faint! Why, 'twere perpetual shame.
    O brave young Prince! thy famous grandfather
    Doth live again in thee. Long mayst thou Eve
    To bear his image and renew his glories!
  SOMERSET. And he that will not fight for such a hope,  
    Go home to bed and, like the owl by day,
    If he arise, be mock'd and wond'red at.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Thanks, gentle Somerset; sweet Oxford, thanks.
  PRINCE OF WALES. And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.

                        Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand
    Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.
  OXFORD. I thought no less. It is his policy
    To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.
  SOMERSET. But he's deceiv'd; we are in readiness.
  QUEEN MARGARET. This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.
  OXFORD. Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.

      Flourish and march. Enter, at a distance, KING EDWARD,
               GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and soldiers

  KING EDWARD. Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood
    Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength,  
    Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
    I need not add more fuel to your fire,
    For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out.
    Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
    My tears gainsay; for every word I speak,
    Ye see, I drink the water of my eye.
    Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
    Is prisoner to the foe; his state usurp'd,
    His realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain,
    His statutes cancell'd, and his treasure spent;
    And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
    You fight in justice. Then, in God's name, lords,
    Be valiant, and give signal to the fight.
                             Alarum, retreat, excursions. Exeunt




SCENE V.
Another part of the field

Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and forces,
With QUEEN MARGARET, OXFORD, and SOMERSET, prisoners

  KING EDWARD. Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
    Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight;
    For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
    Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.
  OXFORD. For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.
  SOMERSET. Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.
                             Exeunt OXFORD and SOMERSET, guarded
  QUEEN MARGARET. So part we sadly in this troublous world,
    To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.
  KING EDWARD. Is proclamation made that who finds Edward
    Shall have a high reward, and he his life?
  GLOUCESTER. It is; and lo where youthful Edward comes.

                Enter soldiers, with PRINCE EDWARD
  
  KING EDWARD. Bring forth the gallant; let us hear him speak.
    What, can so young a man begin to prick?
    Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
    For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
    And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?
  PRINCE OF WALES. Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York.
    Suppose that I am now my father's mouth;
    Resign thy chair, and where I stand kneel thou,
    Whilst I propose the self-same words to the
    Which, traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Ah, that thy father had been so resolv'd!
  GLOUCESTER. That you might still have worn the petticoat
    And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.
  PRINCE OF WALES. Let Aesop fable in a winter's night;
    His currish riddle sorts not with this place.
  GLOUCESTER. By heaven, brat, I'll plague ye for that word.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.
  GLOUCESTER. For God's sake, take away this captive scold.
  PRINCE OF WALES. Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.
  KING EDWARD. Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.  
  CLARENCE. Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.
  PRINCE OF WALES. I know my duty; you are all undutiful.
    Lascivious Edward, and thou perjur'd George,
    And thou misshapen Dick, I tell ye all
    I am your better, traitors as ye are;
    And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.
  KING EDWARD. Take that, the likeness of this railer here.
                                                     [Stabs him]
  GLOUCESTER. Sprawl'st thou? Take that, to end thy agony.
                                                     [Stabs him]
  CLARENCE. And there's for twitting me with perjury.
                                                     [Stabs him]
  QUEEN MARGARET. O, kill me too!
  GLOUCESTER. Marry, and shall.             [Offers to kill her]
  KING EDWARD. Hold, Richard, hold; for we have done to much.
  GLOUCESTER. Why should she live to fill the world with words?
  KING EDWARD. What, doth she swoon? Use means for her recovery.
  GLOUCESTER. Clarence, excuse me to the King my brother.
    I'll hence to London on a serious matter;
    Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.  
  CLARENCE. What? what?
  GLOUCESTER. The Tower! the Tower!                         Exit
  QUEEN MARGARET. O Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy mother, boy!
    Canst thou not speak? O traitors! murderers!
    They that stabb'd Caesar shed no blood at all,
    Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
    If this foul deed were by to equal it.
    He was a man: this, in respect, a child;
    And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
    What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
    No, no, my heart will burst, an if I speak-
    And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
    Butchers and villains! bloody cannibals!
    How sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd!
    You have no children, butchers, if you had,
    The thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse.
    But if you ever chance to have a child,
    Look in his youth to have him so cut off
    As, deathsmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!
  KING EDWARD. Away with her; go, bear her hence perforce.  
  QUEEN MARGARET. Nay, never bear me hence; dispatch me here.
    Here sheathe thy sword; I'll pardon thee my death.
    What, wilt thou not? Then, Clarence, do it thou.
  CLARENCE. By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Good Clarence, do; sweet Clarence, do thou do it.
  CLARENCE. Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
  QUEEN MARGARET. Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself.
    'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
    What! wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
    Hard-favour'd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
    Thou art not here. Murder is thy alms-deed;
    Petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.
  KING EDWARD. Away, I say; I charge ye bear her hence.
  QUEEN MARGARET. So come to you and yours as to this prince.
                                          Exit, led out forcibly
  KING EDWARD. Where's Richard gone?
  CLARENCE. To London, all in post; and, as I guess,
    To make a bloody supper in the Tower.
  KING EDWARD. He's sudden, if a thing comes in his head.
    Now march we hence. Discharge the common sort  
    With pay and thanks; and let's away to London
    And see our gentle queen how well she fares.
    By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.               Exeunt




SCENE VI.
London. The Tower

Enter KING HENRY and GLOUCESTER with the LIEUTENANT, on the walls

  GLOUCESTER. Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?
  KING HENRY. Ay, my good lord- my lord, I should say rather.
    'Tis sin to flatter; 'good' was little better.
    'Good Gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike,
    And both preposterous; therefore, not 'good lord.'
  GLOUCESTER. Sirrah, leave us to ourselves; we must confer.
                                                 Exit LIEUTENANT
  KING HENRY. So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
    So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece,
    And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
    What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?
  GLOUCESTER. Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind:
    The thief doth fear each bush an officer.
  KING HENRY. The bird that hath been limed in a bush
    With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
    And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,  
    Have now the fatal object in my eye
    Where my poor young was lim'd, was caught, and kill'd.
  GLOUCESTER. Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete
    That taught his son the office of a fowl!
    And yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.
  KING HENRY. I, Daedalus; my poor boy, Icarus;
    Thy father, Minos, that denied our course;
    The sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy,
    Thy brother Edward; and thyself, the sea
    Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
    Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
    My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
    Than can my ears that tragic history.
    But wherefore dost thou come? Is't for my life?
  GLOUCESTER. Think'st thou I am an executioner?
  KING HENRY. A persecutor I am sure thou art.
    If murdering innocents be executing,
    Why, then thou are an executioner.
  GLOUCESTER. Thy son I kill'd for his presumption.
  KING HENRY. Hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume,  
    Thou hadst not liv'd to kill a son of mine.
    And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand
    Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
    And many an old man's sigh, and many a widow's,
    And many an orphan's water-standing eye-
    Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
    Orphans for their parents' timeless death-
    Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
    The owl shriek'd at thy birth- an evil sign;
    The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
    Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
    The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
    And chatt'ring pies in dismal discords sung;
    Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
    And yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
    To wit, an indigest deformed lump,
    Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
    Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
    To signify thou cam'st to bite the world;
    And if the rest be true which I have heard,  
    Thou cam'st-
  GLOUCESTER. I'll hear no more. Die, prophet, in thy speech.
                                                     [Stabs him]
    For this, amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.
  KING HENRY. Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
    O, God forgive my sins and pardon thee!               [Dies]
  GLOUCESTER. What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
    Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
    See how my sword weeps for the poor King's death.
    O, may such purple tears be always shed
    From those that wish the downfall of our house!
    If any spark of life be yet remaining,
    Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither-
                                               [Stabs him again]
    I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
    Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of;
    For I have often heard my mother say
    I came into the world with my legs forward.
    Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste
    And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?  
    The midwife wonder'd; and the women cried
    'O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!'
    And so I was, which plainly signified
    That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog.
    Then, since the heavens have shap'd my body so,
    Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
    I have no brother, I am like no brother;
    And this word 'love,' which greybeards call divine,
    Be resident in men like one another,
    And not in me! I am myself alone.
    Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light,
    But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
    For I will buzz abroad such prophecies
    That Edward shall be fearful of his life;
    And then to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
    King Henry and the Prince his son are gone.
    Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest;
    Counting myself but bad till I be best.
    I'll throw thy body in another room,
    And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.  
                                              Exit with the body




SCENE VII.
London. The palace

Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD, QUEEN ELIZABETH, CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER,
HASTINGS, NURSE, with the Young PRINCE, and attendants

  KING EDWARD. Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
    Repurchas'd with the blood of enemies.
    What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn,
    Have we mow'd down in tops of all their pride!
    Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renown'd
    For hardy and undoubted champions;
    Two Cliffords, as the father and the son;
    And two Northumberlands- two braver men
    Ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound;
    With them the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
    That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion
    And made the forest tremble when they roar'd.
    Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
    And made our footstool of security.
    Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.  
    Young Ned, for thee thine uncles and myself
    Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night,
    Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
    That thou might'st repossess the crown in peace;
    And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.
  GLOUCESTER. [Aside] I'll blast his harvest if your head were laid;
    For yet I am not look'd on in the world.
    This shoulder was ordain'd so thick to heave;
    And heave it shall some weight or break my back.
    Work thou the way- and that shall execute.
  KING EDWARD. Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen;
    And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.
  CLARENCE. The duty that I owe unto your Majesty
    I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
  KING EDWARD. Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.
  GLOUCESTER. And that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
    Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.
    [Aside] To say the truth, so Judas kiss'd his master
    And cried 'All hail!' when as he meant all harm.
  KING EDWARD. Now am I seated as my soul delights,  
    Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.
  CLARENCE. What will your Grace have done with Margaret?
    Reignier, her father, to the King of France
    Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
    And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
  KING EDWARD. Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
    And now what rests but that we spend the time
    With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
    Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
    Sound drums and trumpets. Farewell, sour annoy!
    For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.             Exeunt


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1611

KING HENRY THE EIGHTH

by William Shakespeare


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  KING HENRY THE EIGHTH
  CARDINAL WOLSEY               CARDINAL CAMPEIUS
  CAPUCIUS, Ambassador from the Emperor Charles V
  CRANMER, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY
  DUKE OF NORFOLK               DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
  DUKE OF SUFFOLK               EARL OF SURREY
  LORD CHAMBERLAIN              LORD CHANCELLOR
  GARDINER, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER
  BISHOP OF LINCOLN             LORD ABERGAVENNY
  LORD SANDYS                   SIR HENRY GUILDFORD
  SIR THOMAS LOVELL             SIR ANTHONY DENNY
  SIR NICHOLAS VAUX             SECRETARIES to Wolsey
  CROMWELL, servant to Wolsey
  GRIFFITH, gentleman-usher to Queen Katharine
  THREE GENTLEMEN
  DOCTOR BUTTS, physician to the King
  GARTER KING-AT-ARMS
  SURVEYOR to the Duke of Buckingham
  BRANDON, and a SERGEANT-AT-ARMS
  DOORKEEPER Of the Council chamber  
  PORTER, and his MAN           PAGE to Gardiner
  A CRIER

  QUEEN KATHARINE, wife to King Henry, afterwards divorced
  ANNE BULLEN, her Maid of Honour, afterwards Queen
  AN OLD LADY, friend to Anne Bullen
  PATIENCE, woman to Queen Katharine

  Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Lords and Ladies in the Dumb
       Shows; Women attending upon the Queen; Scribes,
       Officers, Guards, and other Attendants; Spirits

                          SCENE:

              London; Westminster; Kimbolton



                 KING HENRY THE EIGHTH

                     THE PROLOGUE.

    I come no more to make you laugh; things now
    That bear a weighty and a serious brow,
    Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe,
    Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow,
    We now present. Those that can pity here
    May, if they think it well, let fall a tear:
    The subject will deserve it. Such as give
    Their money out of hope they may believe
    May here find truth too. Those that come to see
    Only a show or two, and so agree
    The play may pass, if they be still and willing,
    I'll undertake may see away their shilling
    Richly in two short hours. Only they
    That come to hear a merry bawdy play,
    A noise of targets, or to see a fellow
    In a long motley coat guarded with yellow,
    Will be deceiv'd; for, gentle hearers, know,
    To rank our chosen truth with such a show  
    As fool and fight is, beside forfeiting
    Our own brains, and the opinion that we bring
    To make that only true we now intend,
    Will leave us never an understanding friend.
    Therefore, for goodness sake, and as you are known
    The first and happiest hearers of the town,
    Be sad, as we would make ye. Think ye see
    The very persons of our noble story
    As they were living; think you see them great,
    And follow'd with the general throng and sweat
    Of thousand friends; then, in a moment, see
    How soon this mightiness meets misery.
    And if you can be merry then, I'll say
    A man may weep upon his wedding-day.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT I. SCENE 1.

London. The palace

Enter the DUKE OF NORFOLK at one door; at the other,
the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM and the LORD ABERGAVENNY

  BUCKINGHAM. Good morrow, and well met. How have ye done
    Since last we saw in France?
  NORFOLK. I thank your Grace,
    Healthful; and ever since a fresh admirer
    Of what I saw there.
  BUCKINGHAM. An untimely ague
    Stay'd me a prisoner in my chamber when
    Those suns of glory, those two lights of men,
    Met in the vale of Andren.
  NORFOLK. 'Twixt Guynes and Arde-
    I was then present, saw them salute on horseback;
    Beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung
    In their embracement, as they grew together;
    Which had they, what four thron'd ones could have weigh'd  
    Such a compounded one?
  BUCKINGHAM. All the whole time
    I was my chamber's prisoner.
  NORFOLK. Then you lost
    The view of earthly glory; men might say,
    Till this time pomp was single, but now married
    To one above itself. Each following day
    Became the next day's master, till the last
    Made former wonders its. To-day the French,
    All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
    Shone down the English; and to-morrow they
    Made Britain India: every man that stood
    Show'd like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were
    As cherubins, an gilt; the madams too,
    Not us'd to toil, did almost sweat to bear
    The pride upon them, that their very labour
    Was to them as a painting. Now this masque
    Was cried incomparable; and th' ensuing night
    Made it a fool and beggar. The two kings,
    Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst,  
    As presence did present them: him in eye
    still him in praise; and being present both,
    'Twas said they saw but one, and no discerner
    Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns-
    For so they phrase 'em-by their heralds challeng'd
    The noble spirits to arms, they did perform
    Beyond thought's compass, that former fabulous story,
    Being now seen possible enough, got credit,
    That Bevis was believ'd.
  BUCKINGHAM. O, you go far!
  NORFOLK. As I belong to worship, and affect
    In honour honesty, the tract of ev'rything
    Would by a good discourser lose some life
    Which action's self was tongue to. All was royal:
    To the disposing of it nought rebell'd;
    Order gave each thing view. The office did
    Distinctly his full function.
  BUCKINGHAM. Who did guide-
    I mean, who set the body and the limbs
    Of this great sport together, as you guess?  
  NORFOLK. One, certes, that promises no element
    In such a business.
  BUCKINGHAM. I pray you, who, my lord?
  NORFOLK. All this was ord'red by the good discretion
    Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.
  BUCKINGHAM. The devil speed him! No man's pie is freed
    From his ambitious finger. What had he
    To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder
    That such a keech can with his very bulk
    Take up the rays o' th' beneficial sun,
    And keep it from the earth.
  NORFOLK. Surely, sir,
    There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends;
    For, being not propp'd by ancestry, whose grace
    Chalks successors their way, nor call'd upon
    For high feats done to th' crown, neither allied
    To eminent assistants, but spider-like,
    Out of his self-drawing web, 'a gives us note
    The force of his own merit makes his way-
    A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys  
    A place next to the King.
  ABERGAVENNY. I cannot tell
    What heaven hath given him-let some graver eye
    Pierce into that; but I can see his pride
    Peep through each part of him. Whence has he that?
    If not from hell, the devil is a niggard
    Or has given all before, and he begins
    A new hell in himself.
  BUCKINGHAM. Why the devil,
    Upon this French going out, took he upon him-
    Without the privity o' th' King-t' appoint
    Who should attend on him? He makes up the file
    Of all the gentry; for the most part such
    To whom as great a charge as little honour
    He meant to lay upon; and his own letter,
    The honourable board of council out,
    Must fetch him in he papers.
  ABERGAVENNY. I do know
    Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
    By this so sicken'd their estates that never  
    They shall abound as formerly.
  BUCKINGHAM. O, many
    Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em
    For this great journey. What did this vanity
    But minister communication of
    A most poor issue?
  NORFOLK. Grievingly I think
    The peace between the French and us not values
    The cost that did conclude it.
  BUCKINGHAM. Every man,
    After the hideous storm that follow'd, was
    A thing inspir'd, and, not consulting, broke
    Into a general prophecy-that this tempest,
    Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
    The sudden breach on't.
  NORFOLK. Which is budded out;
    For France hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'd
    Our merchants' goods at Bordeaux.
  ABERGAVENNY. Is it therefore
    Th' ambassador is silenc'd?  
  NORFOLK. Marry, is't.
  ABERGAVENNY. A proper tide of a peace, and purchas'd
    At a superfluous rate!
  BUCKINGHAM. Why, all this business
    Our reverend Cardinal carried.
  NORFOLK. Like it your Grace,
    The state takes notice of the private difference
    Betwixt you and the Cardinal. I advise you-
    And take it from a heart that wishes towards you
    Honour and plenteous safety-that you read
    The Cardinal's malice and his potency
    Together; to consider further, that
    What his high hatred would effect wants not
    A minister in his power. You know his nature,
    That he's revengeful; and I know his sword
    Hath a sharp edge-it's long and't may be said
    It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend,
    Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel
    You'll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that rock
    That I advise your shunning.  

      Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, the purse borne before
      him, certain of the guard, and two SECRETARIES
      with papers. The CARDINAL in his passage fixeth his
      eye on BUCKINGHAM, and BUCKINGHAM on him,
      both full of disdain

  WOLSEY. The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor? Ha!
    Where's his examination?
  SECRETARY. Here, so please you.
  WOLSEY. Is he in person ready?
  SECRETARY. Ay, please your Grace.
  WOLSEY. Well, we shall then know more, and Buckingham
    shall lessen this big look.
                                          Exeunt WOLSEY and his train
  BUCKINGHAM. This butcher's cur is venom-mouth'd, and I
    Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best
    Not wake him in his slumber. A beggar's book
    Outworths a noble's blood.
  NORFOLK. What, are you chaf'd?  
    Ask God for temp'rance; that's th' appliance only
    Which your disease requires.
  BUCKINGHAM. I read in's looks
    Matter against me, and his eye revil'd
    Me as his abject object. At this instant
    He bores me with some trick. He's gone to th' King;
    I'll follow, and outstare him.
  NORFOLK. Stay, my lord,
    And let your reason with your choler question
    What 'tis you go about. To climb steep hills
    Requires slow pace at first. Anger is like
    A full hot horse, who being allow'd his way,
    Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England
    Can advise me like you; be to yourself
    As you would to your friend.
  BUCKINGHAM. I'll to the King,
    And from a mouth of honour quite cry down
    This Ipswich fellow's insolence; or proclaim
    There's difference in no persons.
  NORFOLK. Be advis'd:  
    Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot
    That it do singe yourself. We may outrun
    By violent swiftness that which we run at,
    And lose by over-running. Know you not
    The fire that mounts the liquor till't run o'er
    In seeming to augment it wastes it? Be advis'd.
    I say again there is no English soul
    More stronger to direct you than yourself,
    If with the sap of reason you would quench
    Or but allay the fire of passion.
  BUCKINGHAM. Sir,
    I am thankful to you, and I'll go along
    By your prescription; but this top-proud fellow-
    Whom from the flow of gan I name not, but
    From sincere motions, by intelligence,
    And proofs as clear as founts in July when
    We see each grain of gravel-I do know
    To be corrupt and treasonous.
  NORFOLK. Say not treasonous.
  BUCKINGHAM. To th' King I'll say't, and make my vouch as strong  
    As shore of rock. Attend: this holy fox,
    Or wolf, or both-for he is equal rav'nous
    As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief
    As able to perform't, his mind and place
    Infecting one another, yea, reciprocally-
    Only to show his pomp as well in France
    As here at home, suggests the King our master
    To this last costly treaty, th' interview
    That swallowed so much treasure and like a glass
    Did break i' th' wrenching.
  NORFOLK. Faith, and so it did.
  BUCKINGHAM. Pray, give me favour, sir; this cunning cardinal
    The articles o' th' combination drew
    As himself pleas'd; and they were ratified
    As he cried 'Thus let be' to as much end
    As give a crutch to th' dead. But our Count-Cardinal
    Has done this, and 'tis well; for worthy Wolsey,
    Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows,
    Which, as I take it, is a kind of puppy
    To th' old dam treason: Charles the Emperor,  
    Under pretence to see the Queen his aunt-
    For 'twas indeed his colour, but he came
    To whisper Wolsey-here makes visitation-
    His fears were that the interview betwixt
    England and France might through their amity
    Breed him some prejudice; for from this league
    Peep'd harms that menac'd him-privily
    Deals with our Cardinal; and, as I trow-
    Which I do well, for I am sure the Emperor
    Paid ere he promis'd; whereby his suit was granted
    Ere it was ask'd-but when the way was made,
    And pav'd with gold, the Emperor thus desir'd,
    That he would please to alter the King's course,
    And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know,
    As soon he shall by me, that thus the Cardinal
    Does buy and sell his honour as he pleases,
    And for his own advantage.
  NORFOLK. I am sorry
    To hear this of him, and could wish he were
    Something mistaken in't.  
  BUCKINGHAM. No, not a syllable:
    I do pronounce him in that very shape
    He shall appear in proof.

       Enter BRANDON, a SERGEANT-AT-ARMS before him,
              and two or three of the guard

  BRANDON. Your office, sergeant: execute it.
  SERGEANT. Sir,
    My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl
    Of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, I
    Arrest thee of high treason, in the name
    Of our most sovereign King.
  BUCKINGHAM. Lo you, my lord,
    The net has fall'n upon me! I shall perish
    Under device and practice.
  BRANDON. I am sorry
    To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on
    The business present; 'tis his Highness' pleasure
    You shall to th' Tower.  
  BUCKINGHAM. It will help nothing
    To plead mine innocence; for that dye is on me
    Which makes my whit'st part black. The will of heav'n
    Be done in this and all things! I obey.
    O my Lord Aberga'ny, fare you well!
  BRANDON. Nay, he must bear you company.
    [To ABERGAVENNY]  The King
    Is pleas'd you shall to th' Tower, till you know
    How he determines further.
  ABERGAVENNY. As the Duke said,
    The will of heaven be done, and the King's pleasure
    By me obey'd.
  BRANDON. Here is warrant from
    The King t' attach Lord Montacute and the bodies
    Of the Duke's confessor, John de la Car,
    One Gilbert Peck, his chancellor-
  BUCKINGHAM. So, so!
    These are the limbs o' th' plot; no more, I hope.
  BRANDON. A monk o' th' Chartreux.
  BUCKINGHAM. O, Nicholas Hopkins?  
  BRANDON. He.
  BUCKINGHAM. My surveyor is false. The o'er-great Cardinal
    Hath show'd him gold; my life is spann'd already.
    I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
    Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on
    By dark'ning my clear sun. My lord, farewell.
    Exeunt




ACT I. SCENE 2.

London. The Council Chamber

Cornets. Enter KING HENRY, leaning on the CARDINAL'S shoulder, the NOBLES,
and SIR THOMAS LOVELL, with others. The CARDINAL places himself
under the KING'S feet on his right side

  KING. My life itself, and the best heart of it,
    Thanks you for this great care; I stood i' th' level
    Of a full-charg'd confederacy, and give thanks
    To you that chok'd it. Let be call'd before us
    That gentleman of Buckingham's. In person
    I'll hear his confessions justify;
    And point by point the treasons of his master
    He shall again relate.

      A noise within, crying 'Room for the Queen!'
      Enter the QUEEN, usher'd by the DUKES OF NORFOLK
      and SUFFOLK; she kneels. The KING riseth
      from his state, takes her up, kisses and placeth her  
      by him

  QUEEN KATHARINE. Nay, we must longer kneel: I am suitor.
  KING. Arise, and take place by us. Half your suit
    Never name to us: you have half our power.
    The other moiety ere you ask is given;
    Repeat your will, and take it.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Thank your Majesty.
    That you would love yourself, and in that love
    Not unconsidered leave your honour nor
    The dignity of your office, is the point
    Of my petition.
  KING. Lady mine, proceed.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. I am solicited, not by a few,
    And those of true condition, that your subjects
    Are in great grievance: there have been commissions
    Sent down among 'em which hath flaw'd the heart
    Of all their loyalties; wherein, although,
    My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
    Most bitterly on you as putter-on  
    Of these exactions, yet the King our master-
    Whose honour Heaven shield from soil!-even he escapes not
    Language unmannerly; yea, such which breaks
    The sides of loyalty, and almost appears
    In loud rebellion.
  NORFOLK. Not almost appears-
    It doth appear; for, upon these taxations,
    The clothiers all, not able to maintain
    The many to them 'longing, have put of
    The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who
    Unfit for other life, compell'd by hunger
    And lack of other means, in desperate manner
    Daring th' event to th' teeth, are all in uproar,
    And danger serves among them.
  KING. Taxation!
    Wherein? and what taxation? My Lord Cardinal,
    You that are blam'd for it alike with us,
    Know you of this taxation?
  WOLSEY. Please you, sir,
    I know but of a single part in aught  
    Pertains to th' state, and front but in that file
    Where others tell steps with me.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. No, my lord!
    You know no more than others! But you frame
    Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
    To those which would not know them, and yet must
    Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions,
    Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are
    Most pestilent to th' hearing; and to bear 'em
    The back is sacrifice to th' load. They say
    They are devis'd by you, or else you suffer
    Too hard an exclamation.
  KING. Still exaction!
    The nature of it? In what kind, let's know,
    Is this exaction?
  QUEEN KATHARINE. I am much too venturous
    In tempting of your patience, but am bold'ned
    Under your promis'd pardon. The subjects' grief
    Comes through commissions, which compels from each
    The sixth part of his substance, to be levied  
    Without delay; and the pretence for this
    Is nam'd your wars in France. This makes bold mouths;
    Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
    Allegiance in them; their curses now
    Live where their prayers did; and it's come to pass
    This tractable obedience is a slave
    To each incensed will. I would your Highness
    Would give it quick consideration, for
    There is no primer business.
  KING. By my life,
    This is against our pleasure.
  WOLSEY. And for me,
    I have no further gone in this than by
    A single voice; and that not pass'd me but
    By learned approbation of the judges. If I am
    Traduc'd by ignorant tongues, which neither know
    My faculties nor person, yet will be
    The chronicles of my doing, let me say
    'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
    That virtue must go through. We must not stint  
    Our necessary actions in the fear
    To cope malicious censurers, which ever
    As rav'nous fishes do a vessel follow
    That is new-trimm'd, but benefit no further
    Than vainly longing. What we oft do best,
    By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is
    Not ours, or not allow'd; what worst, as oft
    Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
    For our best act. If we shall stand still,
    In fear our motion will be mock'd or carp'd at,
    We should take root here where we sit, or sit
    State-statues only.
  KING. Things done well
    And with a care exempt themselves from fear:
    Things done without example, in their issue
    Are to be fear'd. Have you a precedent
    Of this commission? I believe, not any.
    We must not rend our subjects from our laws,
    And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each?
    A trembling contribution! Why, we take  
    From every tree lop, bark, and part o' th' timber;
    And though we leave it with a root, thus hack'd,
    The air will drink the sap. To every county
    Where this is question'd send our letters with
    Free pardon to each man that has denied
    The force of this commission. Pray, look tot;
    I put it to your care.
  WOLSEY. [Aside to the SECRETARY]  A word with you.
    Let there be letters writ to every shire
    Of the King's grace and pardon. The grieved commons
    Hardly conceive of me-let it be nois'd
    That through our intercession this revokement
    And pardon comes. I shall anon advise you
    Further in the proceeding.                         Exit SECRETARY

                    Enter SURVEYOR

  QUEEN KATHARINE. I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham
    Is run in your displeasure.
  KING. It grieves many.  
    The gentleman is learn'd and a most rare speaker;
    To nature none more bound; his training such
    That he may furnish and instruct great teachers
    And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see,
    When these so noble benefits shall prove
    Not well dispos'd, the mind growing once corrupt,
    They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
    Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,
    Who was enroll'd 'mongst wonders, and when we,
    Almost with ravish'd list'ning, could not find
    His hour of speech a minute-he, my lady,
    Hath into monstrous habits put the graces
    That once were his, and is become as black
    As if besmear'd in hell. Sit by us; you shall hear-
    This was his gentleman in trust-of him
    Things to strike honour sad. Bid him recount
    The fore-recited practices, whereof
    We cannot feel too little, hear too much.
  WOLSEY. Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you,
    Most like a careful subject, have collected  
    Out of the Duke of Buckingham.
  KING. Speak freely.
  SURVEYOR. First, it was usual with him-every day
    It would infect his speech-that if the King
    Should without issue die, he'll carry it so
    To make the sceptre his. These very words
    I've heard him utter to his son-in-law,
    Lord Aberga'ny, to whom by oath he menac'd
    Revenge upon the Cardinal.
  WOLSEY. Please your Highness, note
    This dangerous conception in this point:
    Not friended by his wish, to your high person
    His will is most malignant, and it stretches
    Beyond you to your friends.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. My learn'd Lord Cardinal,
    Deliver all with charity.
  KING. Speak on.
    How grounded he his title to the crown
    Upon our fail? To this point hast thou heard him
    At any time speak aught?  
  SURVEYOR. He was brought to this
    By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Henton.
  KING. What was that Henton?
  SURVEYOR. Sir, a Chartreux friar,
    His confessor, who fed him every minute
    With words of sovereignty.
  KING. How know'st thou this?
  SURVEYOR. Not long before your Highness sped to France,
    The Duke being at the Rose, within the parish
    Saint Lawrence Poultney, did of me demand
    What was the speech among the Londoners
    Concerning the French journey. I replied
    Men fear'd the French would prove perfidious,
    To the King's danger. Presently the Duke
    Said 'twas the fear indeed and that he doubted
    'Twould prove the verity of certain words
    Spoke by a holy monk 'that oft' says he
    'Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit
    John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hour
    To hear from him a matter of some moment;  
    Whom after under the confession's seal
    He solemnly had sworn that what he spoke
    My chaplain to no creature living but
    To me should utter, with demure confidence
    This pausingly ensu'd: "Neither the King nor's heirs,
    Tell you the Duke, shall prosper; bid him strive
    To gain the love o' th' commonalty; the Duke
    Shall govern England."'
  QUEEN KATHARINE. If I know you well,
    You were the Duke's surveyor, and lost your office
    On the complaint o' th' tenants. Take good heed
    You charge not in your spleen a noble person
    And spoil your nobler soul. I say, take heed;
    Yes, heartily beseech you.
  KING. Let him on.
    Go forward.
  SURVEYOR. On my soul, I'll speak but truth.
    I told my lord the Duke, by th' devil's illusions
    The monk might be deceiv'd, and that 'twas dangerous
      for him  
    To ruminate on this so far, until
    It forg'd him some design, which, being believ'd,
    It was much like to do. He answer'd 'Tush,
    It can do me no damage'; adding further
    That, had the King in his last sickness fail'd,
    The Cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads
    Should have gone off.
  KING. Ha! what, so rank? Ah ha!
    There's mischief in this man. Canst thou say further?
  SURVEYOR. I can, my liege.
  KING. Proceed.
  SURVEYOR. Being at Greenwich,
    After your Highness had reprov'd the Duke
    About Sir William Bulmer-
  KING. I remember
    Of such a time: being my sworn servant,
    The Duke retain'd him his. But on: what hence?
  SURVEYOR. 'If' quoth he 'I for this had been committed-
    As to the Tower I thought-I would have play'd
    The part my father meant to act upon  
    Th' usurper Richard; who, being at Salisbury,
    Made suit to come in's presence, which if granted,
    As he made semblance of his duty, would
    Have put his knife into him.'
  KING. A giant traitor!
  WOLSEY. Now, madam, may his Highness live in freedom,
    And this man out of prison?
  QUEEN KATHARINE. God mend all!
  KING. There's something more would out of thee: what say'st?
  SURVEYOR. After 'the Duke his father' with the 'knife,'
    He stretch'd him, and, with one hand on his dagger,
    Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes,
    He did discharge a horrible oath, whose tenour
    Was, were he evil us'd, he would outgo
    His father by as much as a performance
    Does an irresolute purpose.
  KING. There's his period,
    To sheath his knife in us. He is attach'd;
    Call him to present trial. If he may
    Find mercy in the law, 'tis his; if none,  
    Let him not seek't of us. By day and night!
    He's traitor to th' height.                                Exeunt




ACT I. SCENE 3.

London. The palace

Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN and LORD SANDYS

  CHAMBERLAIN. Is't possible the spells of France should juggle
    Men into such strange mysteries?
  SANDYS. New customs,
    Though they be never so ridiculous,
    Nay, let 'em be unmanly, yet are follow'd.
  CHAMBERLAIN. As far as I see, all the good our English
    Have got by the late voyage is but merely
    A fit or two o' th' face; but they are shrewd ones;
    For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
    Their very noses had been counsellors
    To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.
  SANDYS. They have all new legs, and lame ones. One would take it,
    That never saw 'em pace before, the spavin
    Or springhalt reign'd among 'em.
  CHAMBERLAIN. Death! my lord,
    Their clothes are after such a pagan cut to't,  
    That sure th' have worn out Christendom.

           Enter SIR THOMAS LOVELL

    How now?
    What news, Sir Thomas Lovell?
  LOVELL. Faith, my lord,
    I hear of none but the new proclamation
    That's clapp'd upon the court gate.
  CHAMBERLAIN. What is't for?
  LOVELL. The reformation of our travell'd gallants,
    That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.
  CHAMBERLAIN. I am glad 'tis there. Now I would pray our monsieurs
    To think an English courtier may be wise,
    And never see the Louvre.
  LOVELL. They must either,
    For so run the conditions, leave those remnants
    Of fool and feather that they got in France,
    With all their honourable points of ignorance
    Pertaining thereunto-as fights and fireworks;  
    Abusing better men than they can be,
    Out of a foreign wisdom-renouncing clean
    The faith they have in tennis, and tall stockings,
    Short blist'red breeches, and those types of travel
    And understand again like honest men,
    Or pack to their old playfellows. There, I take it,
    They may, cum privilegio, wear away
    The lag end of their lewdness and be laugh'd at.
  SANDYS. 'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases
    Are grown so catching.
  CHAMBERLAIN. What a loss our ladies
    Will have of these trim vanities!
  LOVELL. Ay, marry,
    There will be woe indeed, lords: the sly whoresons
    Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies.
    A French song and a fiddle has no fellow.
  SANDYS. The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going,
    For sure there's no converting 'em. Now
    An honest country lord, as I am, beaten
    A long time out of play, may bring his plainsong  
    And have an hour of hearing; and, by'r Lady,
    Held current music too.
  CHAMBERLAIN. Well said, Lord Sandys;
    Your colt's tooth is not cast yet.
  SANDYS. No, my lord,
    Nor shall not while I have a stamp.
  CHAMBERLAIN. Sir Thomas,
    Whither were you a-going?
  LOVELL. To the Cardinal's;
    Your lordship is a guest too.
  CHAMBERLAIN. O, 'tis true;
    This night he makes a supper, and a great one,
    To many lords and ladies; there will be
    The beauty of this kingdom, I'll assure you.
  LOVELL. That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,
    A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us;
    His dews fall everywhere.
  CHAMBERLAIN. No doubt he's noble;
    He had a black mouth that said other of him.
  SANDYS. He may, my lord; has wherewithal. In him  
    Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine:
    Men of his way should be most liberal,
    They are set here for examples.
  CHAMBERLAIN. True, they are so;
    But few now give so great ones. My barge stays;
    Your lordship shall along. Come, good Sir Thomas,
    We shall be late else; which I would not be,
    For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford,
    This night to be comptrollers.
  SANDYS. I am your lordship's.                                Exeunt




ACT I. SCENE 4.

London. The Presence Chamber in York Place

Hautboys. A small table under a state for the Cardinal,
a longer table for the guests. Then enter ANNE BULLEN,
and divers other LADIES and GENTLEMEN, as guests, at one door;
at another door enter SIR HENRY GUILDFORD

  GUILDFORD. Ladies, a general welcome from his Grace
    Salutes ye all; this night he dedicates
    To fair content and you. None here, he hopes,
    In all this noble bevy, has brought with her
    One care abroad; he would have all as merry
    As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome,
    Can make good people.

       Enter LORD CHAMBERLAIN, LORD SANDYS, and SIR
                  THOMAS LOVELL

    O, my lord, y'are tardy,  
    The very thought of this fair company
    Clapp'd wings to me.
  CHAMBERLAIN. You are young, Sir Harry Guildford.
  SANDYS. Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal
    But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these
    Should find a running banquet ere they rested
    I think would better please 'em. By my life,
    They are a sweet society of fair ones.
  LOVELL. O that your lordship were but now confessor
    To one or two of these!
  SANDYS. I would I were;
    They should find easy penance.
  LOVELL. Faith, how easy?
  SANDYS. As easy as a down bed would afford it.
  CHAMBERLAIN. Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry,
    Place you that side; I'll take the charge of this.
    His Grace is ent'ring. Nay, you must not freeze:
    Two women plac'd together makes cold weather.
    My Lord Sandys, you are one will keep 'em waking:
    Pray sit between these ladies.  
  SANDYS. By my faith,
    And thank your lordship. By your leave, sweet ladies.
                 [Seats himself between ANNE BULLEN and another lady]
    If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me;
    I had it from my father.
  ANNE. Was he mad, sir?
  SANDYS. O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too.
    But he would bite none; just as I do now,
    He would kiss you twenty with a breath.              [Kisses her]
  CHAMBERLAIN. Well said, my lord.
    So, now y'are fairly seated. Gentlemen,
    The penance lies on you if these fair ladies
    Pass away frowning.
  SANDYS. For my little cure,
    Let me alone.

         Hautboys. Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, attended; and
                         takes his state

  WOLSEY. Y'are welcome, my fair guests. That noble lady  
    Or gentleman that is not freely merry
    Is not my friend. This, to confirm my welcome-
    And to you all, good health!                             [Drinks]
  SANDYS. Your Grace is noble.
    Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks
    And save me so much talking.
  WOLSEY. My Lord Sandys,
    I am beholding to you. Cheer your neighbours.
    Ladies, you are not merry. Gentlemen,
    Whose fault is this?
  SANDYS. The red wine first must rise
    In their fair cheeks, my lord; then we shall have 'em
    Talk us to silence.
  ANNE. You are a merry gamester,
    My Lord Sandys.
  SANDYS. Yes, if I make my play.
    Here's to your ladyship; and pledge it, madam,
    For 'tis to such a thing-
  ANNE. You cannot show me.
  SANDYS. I told your Grace they would talk anon.  
                             [Drum and trumpet. Chambers discharg'd]
  WOLSEY. What's that?
  CHAMBERLAIN. Look out there, some of ye.             Exit a SERVANT
  WOLSEY. What warlike voice,
    And to what end, is this? Nay, ladies, fear not:
    By all the laws of war y'are privileg'd.

            Re-enter SERVANT

  CHAMBERLAIN. How now! what is't?
  SERVANT. A noble troop of strangers-
    For so they seem. Th' have left their barge and landed,
    And hither make, as great ambassadors
    From foreign princes.
  WOLSEY. Good Lord Chamberlain,
    Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue;
    And pray receive 'em nobly and conduct 'em
    Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
    Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
              Exit CHAMBERLAIN attended. All rise, and tables remov'd  
    You have now a broken banquet, but we'll mend it.
    A good digestion to you all; and once more
    I show'r a welcome on ye; welcome all.

      Hautboys. Enter the KING, and others, as maskers,
      habited like shepherds, usher'd by the LORD CHAMBERLAIN.
      They pass directly before the CARDINAL,
      and gracefully salute him

    A noble company! What are their pleasures?
  CHAMBERLAIN. Because they speak no English, thus they pray'd
    To tell your Grace, that, having heard by fame
    Of this so noble and so fair assembly
    This night to meet here, they could do no less,
    Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,
    But leave their flocks and, under your fair conduct,
    Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat
    An hour of revels with 'em.
  WOLSEY. Say, Lord Chamberlain,
    They have done my poor house grace; for which I pay 'em  
    A thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their pleasures.
                   [They choose ladies. The KING chooses ANNE BULLEN]
  KING. The fairest hand I ever touch'd! O beauty,
    Till now I never knew thee!                        [Music. Dance]
  WOLSEY. My lord!
  CHAMBERLAIN. Your Grace?
  WOLSEY. Pray tell 'em thus much from me:
    There should be one amongst 'em, by his person,
    More worthy this place than myself; to whom,
    If I but knew him, with my love and duty
    I would surrender it.
  CHAMBERLAIN. I will, my lord.
                                         [He whispers to the maskers]
  WOLSEY. What say they?
  CHAMBERLAIN. Such a one, they all confess,
    There is indeed; which they would have your Grace
    Find out, and he will take it.
  WOLSEY. Let me see, then.                    [Comes from his state]
    By all your good leaves, gentlemen, here I'll make
    My royal choice.  
  KING.  [Unmasking]  Ye have found him, Cardinal.
    You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord.
    You are a churchman, or, I'll tell you, Cardinal,
    I should judge now unhappily.
  WOLSEY. I am glad
    Your Grace is grown so pleasant.
  KING. My Lord Chamberlain,
    Prithee come hither: what fair lady's that?
  CHAMBERLAIN. An't please your Grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's
      daughter-
    The Viscount Rochford-one of her Highness' women.
  KING. By heaven, she is a dainty one. Sweet heart,
    I were unmannerly to take you out
    And not to kiss you. A health, gentlemen!
    Let it go round.
  WOLSEY. Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready
    I' th' privy chamber?
  LOVELL. Yes, my lord.
  WOLSEY. Your Grace,
    I fear, with dancing is a little heated.  
  KING. I fear, too much.
  WOLSEY. There's fresher air, my lord,
    In the next chamber.
  KING. Lead in your ladies, ev'ry one. Sweet partner,
    I must not yet forsake you. Let's be merry:
    Good my Lord Cardinal, I have half a dozen healths
    To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure
    To lead 'em once again; and then let's dream
    Who's best in favour. Let the music knock it.
                                                Exeunt, with trumpets




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE 1.

Westminster. A street

Enter two GENTLEMEN, at several doors

  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Whither away so fast?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. O, God save ye!
    Ev'n to the Hall, to hear what shall become
    Of the great Duke of Buckingham.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I'll save you
    That labour, sir. All's now done but the ceremony
    Of bringing back the prisoner.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Were you there?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Yes, indeed, was I.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Pray, speak what has happen'd.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. You may guess quickly what.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Is he found guilty?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Yes, truly is he, and condemn'd upon't.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I am sorry for't.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. So are a number more.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. But, pray, how pass'd it?  
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I'll tell you in a little. The great Duke.
    Came to the bar; where to his accusations
    He pleaded still not guilty, and alleged
    Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.
    The King's attorney, on the contrary,
    Urg'd on the examinations, proofs, confessions,
    Of divers witnesses; which the Duke desir'd
    To have brought, viva voce, to his face;
    At which appear'd against him his surveyor,
    Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor, and John Car,
    Confessor to him, with that devil-monk,
    Hopkins, that made this mischief.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. That was he
    That fed him with his prophecies?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. The same.
    All these accus'd him strongly, which he fain
    Would have flung from him; but indeed he could not;
    And so his peers, upon this evidence,
    Have found him guilty of high treason. Much
    He spoke, and learnedly, for life; but all  
    Was either pitied in him or forgotten.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. After all this, how did he bear him-self
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. When he was brought again to th' bar to hear
    His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirr'd
    With such an agony he sweat extremely,
    And something spoke in choler, ill and hasty;
    But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
    In all the rest show'd a most noble patience.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I do not think he fears death.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Sure, he does not;
    He never was so womanish; the cause
    He may a little grieve at.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Certainly
    The Cardinal is the end of this.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. 'Tis likely,
    By all conjectures: first, Kildare's attainder,
    Then deputy of Ireland, who remov'd,
    Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,
    Lest he should help his father.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. That trick of state  
    Was a deep envious one.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. At his return
    No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,
    And generally: whoever the King favours
    The Cardinal instantly will find employment,
    And far enough from court too.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. All the commons
    Hate him perniciously, and, o' my conscience,
    Wish him ten fathom deep: this Duke as much
    They love and dote on; call him bounteous Buckingham,
    The mirror of all courtesy-

      Enter BUCKINGHAM from his arraignment, tip-staves
      before him; the axe with the edge towards him; halberds
      on each side; accompanied with SIR THOMAS
      LOVELL, SIR NICHOLAS VAUX, SIR WILLIAM SANDYS,
      and common people, etc.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Stay there, sir,
    And see the noble ruin'd man you speak of.  
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Let's stand close, and behold him.
  BUCKINGHAM. All good people,
    You that thus far have come to pity me,
    Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
    I have this day receiv'd a traitor's judgment,
    And by that name must die; yet, heaven bear witness,
    And if I have a conscience, let it sink me
    Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful!
    The law I bear no malice for my death:
    'T has done, upon the premises, but justice.
    But those that sought it I could wish more Christians.
    Be what they will, I heartily forgive 'em;
    Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief
    Nor build their evils on the graves of great men,
    For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
    For further life in this world I ne'er hope
    Nor will I sue, although the King have mercies
    More than I dare make faults. You few that lov'd me
    And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
    His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave  
    Is only bitter to him, only dying,
    Go with me like good angels to my end;
    And as the long divorce of steel falls on me
    Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,
    And lift my soul to heaven. Lead on, a God's name.
  LOVELL. I do beseech your Grace, for charity,
    If ever any malice in your heart
    Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
  BUCKINGHAM. Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you
    As I would be forgiven. I forgive all.
    There cannot be those numberless offences
    'Gainst me that I cannot take peace with. No black envy
    Shall mark my grave. Commend me to his Grace;
    And if he speak of Buckingham, pray tell him
    You met him half in heaven. My vows and prayers
    Yet are the King's, and, till my soul forsake,
    Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live
    Longer than I have time to tell his years;
    Ever belov'd and loving may his rule be;
    And when old time Shall lead him to his end,  
    Goodness and he fill up one monument!
  LOVELL. To th' water side I must conduct your Grace;
    Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
    Who undertakes you to your end.
  VAUX. Prepare there;
    The Duke is coming; see the barge be ready;
    And fit it with such furniture as suits
    The greatness of his person.
  BUCKINGHAM. Nay, Sir Nicholas,
    Let it alone; my state now will but mock me.
    When I came hither I was Lord High Constable
    And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun.
    Yet I am richer than my base accusers
    That never knew what truth meant; I now seal it;
    And with that blood will make 'em one day groan fort.
    My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,
    Who first rais'd head against usurping Richard,
    Flying for succour to his servant Banister,
    Being distress'd, was by that wretch betray'd
    And without trial fell; God's peace be with him!  
    Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying
    My father's loss, like a most royal prince,
    Restor'd me to my honours, and out of ruins
    Made my name once more noble. Now his son,
    Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name, and all
    That made me happy, at one stroke has taken
    For ever from the world. I had my trial,
    And must needs say a noble one; which makes me
    A little happier than my wretched father;
    Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both
    Fell by our servants, by those men we lov'd most-
    A most unnatural and faithless service.
    Heaven has an end in all. Yet, you that hear me,
    This from a dying man receive as certain:
    Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels,
    Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends
    And give your hearts to, when they once perceive
    The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
    Like water from ye, never found again
    But where they mean to sink ye. All good people,  
    Pray for me! I must now forsake ye; the last hour
    Of my long weary life is come upon me.
    Farewell;
    And when you would say something that is sad,
    Speak how I fell. I have done; and God forgive me!
                                          Exeunt BUCKINGHAM and train
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. O, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls,
    I fear, too many curses on their heads
    That were the authors.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. If the Duke be guiltless,
    'Tis full of woe; yet I can give you inkling
    Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
    Greater than this.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Good angels keep it from us!
    What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. This secret is so weighty, 'twill require
    A strong faith to conceal it.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Let me have it;
    I do not talk much.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I am confident.  
    You shall, sir. Did you not of late days hear
    A buzzing of a separation
    Between the King and Katharine?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Yes, but it held not;
    For when the King once heard it, out of anger
    He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
    To stop the rumour and allay those tongues
    That durst disperse it.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. But that slander, sir,
    Is found a truth now; for it grows again
    Fresher than e'er it was, and held for certain
    The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal
    Or some about him near have, out of malice
    To the good Queen, possess'd him with a scruple
    That will undo her. To confirm this too,
    Cardinal Campeius is arriv'd and lately;
    As all think, for this business.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. 'Tis the Cardinal;
    And merely to revenge him on the Emperor
    For not bestowing on him at his asking  
    The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purpos'd.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I think you have hit the mark; but is't
        not cruel
    That she should feel the smart of this? The Cardinal
    Will have his will, and she must fall.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. 'Tis woeful.
    We are too open here to argue this;
    Let's think in private more.                               Exeunt




ACT II. SCENE 2.

London. The palace

Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN reading this letter

  CHAMBERLAIN. 'My lord,
    'The horses your lordship sent for, with all the care
    had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and furnish'd. They were
    young and handsome, and of the best breed in the north.
    When they were ready to set out for London, a man of
    my Lord Cardinal's, by commission, and main power, took
    'em from me, with this reason: his master would be serv'd
    before a subject, if not before the King; which stopp'd
    our mouths, sir.'

    I fear he will indeed. Well, let him have them.
    He will have all, I think.

    Enter to the LORD CHAMBERLAIN the DUKES OF NORFOLK and SUFFOLK

  NORFOLK. Well met, my Lord Chamberlain.  
  CHAMBERLAIN. Good day to both your Graces.
  SUFFOLK. How is the King employ'd?
  CHAMBERLAIN. I left him private,
    Full of sad thoughts and troubles.
  NORFOLK. What's the cause?
  CHAMBERLAIN. It seems the marriage with his brother's wife
    Has crept too near his conscience.
  SUFFOLK. No, his conscience
    Has crept too near another lady.
  NORFOLK. 'Tis so;
    This is the Cardinal's doing; the King-Cardinal,
    That blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune,
    Turns what he list. The King will know him one day.
  SUFFOLK. Pray God he do! He'll never know himself else.
  NORFOLK. How holily he works in all his business!
    And with what zeal! For, now he has crack'd the league
    Between us and the Emperor, the Queen's great nephew,
    He dives into the King's soul and there scatters
    Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,
    Fears, and despairs-and all these for his marriage;  
    And out of all these to restore the King,
    He counsels a divorce, a loss of her
    That like a jewel has hung twenty years
    About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;
    Of her that loves him with that excellence
    That angels love good men with; even of her
    That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,
    Will bless the King-and is not this course pious?
  CHAMBERLAIN. Heaven keep me from such counsel! 'Tis most true
    These news are everywhere; every tongue speaks 'em,
    And every true heart weeps for 't. All that dare
    Look into these affairs see this main end-
    The French King's sister. Heaven will one day open
    The King's eyes, that so long have slept upon
    This bold bad man.
  SUFFOLK. And free us from his slavery.
  NORFOLK. We had need pray, and heartily, for our deliverance;
    Or this imperious man will work us an
    From princes into pages. All men's honours
    Lie like one lump before him, to be fashion'd  
    Into what pitch he please.
  SUFFOLK. For me, my lords,
    I love him not, nor fear him-there's my creed;
    As I am made without him, so I'll stand,
    If the King please; his curses and his blessings
    Touch me alike; th' are breath I not believe in.
    I knew him, and I know him; so I leave him
    To him that made him proud-the Pope.
  NORFOLK. Let's in;
    And with some other business put the King
    From these sad thoughts that work too much upon him.
    My lord, you'll bear us company?
  CHAMBERLAIN. Excuse me,
    The King has sent me otherwhere; besides,
    You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him.
    Health to your lordships!
  NORFOLK. Thanks, my good Lord Chamberlain.
                            Exit LORD CHAMBERLAIN; and the KING draws
                               the curtain and sits reading pensively
  SUFFOLK. How sad he looks; sure, he is much afflicted.  
  KING. Who's there, ha?
  NORFOLK. Pray God he be not angry.
  KING HENRY. Who's there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
    Into my private meditations?
    Who am I, ha?
  NORFOLK. A gracious king that pardons all offences
    Malice ne'er meant. Our breach of duty this way
    Is business of estate, in which we come
    To know your royal pleasure.
  KING. Ye are too bold.
    Go to; I'll make ye know your times of business.
    Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?

      Enter WOLSEY and CAMPEIUS with a commission

    Who's there? My good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
    The quiet of my wounded conscience,
    Thou art a cure fit for a King.  [To CAMPEIUS]  You're
      welcome,
    Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom.  
    Use us and it.  [To WOLSEY]  My good lord, have great care
    I be not found a talker.
  WOLSEY. Sir, you cannot.
    I would your Grace would give us but an hour
    Of private conference.
  KING.  [To NORFOLK and SUFFOLK]  We are busy; go.
  NORFOLK.  [Aside to SUFFOLK]  This priest has no pride in him!
  SUFFOLK.  [Aside to NORFOLK]  Not to speak of!
    I would not be so sick though for his place.
    But this cannot continue.
  NORFOLK.  [Aside to SUFFOLK]  If it do,
    I'll venture one have-at-him.
  SUFFOLK.  [Aside to NORFOLK]  I another.
                                           Exeunt NORFOLK and SUFFOLK
  WOLSEY. Your Grace has given a precedent of wisdom
    Above all princes, in committing freely
    Your scruple to the voice of Christendom.
    Who can be angry now? What envy reach you?
    The Spaniard, tied by blood and favour to her,
    Must now confess, if they have any goodness,  
    The trial just and noble. All the clerks,
    I mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms
    Have their free voices. Rome the nurse of judgment,
    Invited by your noble self, hath sent
    One general tongue unto us, this good man,
    This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius,
    Whom once more I present unto your Highness.
  KING. And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
    And thank the holy conclave for their loves.
    They have sent me such a man I would have wish'd for.
  CAMPEIUS. Your Grace must needs deserve an strangers' loves,
    You are so noble. To your Highness' hand
    I tender my commission; by whose virtue-
    The court of Rome commanding-you, my Lord
    Cardinal of York, are join'd with me their servant
    In the unpartial judging of this business.
  KING. Two equal men. The Queen shall be acquainted
    Forthwith for what you come. Where's Gardiner?
  WOLSEY. I know your Majesty has always lov'd her
    So dear in heart not to deny her that  
    A woman of less place might ask by law-
    Scholars allow'd freely to argue for her.
  KING. Ay, and the best she shall have; and my favour
    To him that does best. God forbid else. Cardinal,
    Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new secretary;
    I find him a fit fellow.                              Exit WOLSEY

          Re-enter WOLSEY with GARDINER

  WOLSEY.  [Aside to GARDINER]  Give me your hand: much
      joy and favour to you;
    You are the King's now.
  GARDINER.  [Aside to WOLSEY]  But to be commanded
    For ever by your Grace, whose hand has rais'd me.
  KING. Come hither, Gardiner.                   [Walks and whispers]
  CAMPEIUS. My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace
    In this man's place before him?
  WOLSEY. Yes, he was.
  CAMPEIUS. Was he not held a learned man?
  WOLSEY. Yes, surely.  
  CAMPEIUS. Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then,
    Even of yourself, Lord Cardinal.
  WOLSEY. How! Of me?
  CAMPEIUS. They will not stick to say you envied him
    And, fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous,
    Kept him a foreign man still; which so griev'd him
    That he ran mad and died.
  WOLSEY. Heav'n's peace be with him!
    That's Christian care enough. For living murmurers
    There's places of rebuke. He was a fool,
    For he would needs be virtuous: that good fellow,
    If I command him, follows my appointment.
    I will have none so near else. Learn this, brother,
    We live not to be grip'd by meaner persons.
  KING. Deliver this with modesty to th' Queen.
                                                        Exit GARDINER
    The most convenient place that I can think of
    For such receipt of learning is Blackfriars;
    There ye shall meet about this weighty business-
    My Wolsey, see it furnish'd. O, my lord,  
    Would it not grieve an able man to leave
    So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!
    O, 'tis a tender place! and I must leave her.              Exeunt




ACT II. SCENE 3.

London. The palace

Enter ANNE BULLEN and an OLD LADY

  ANNE. Not for that neither. Here's the pang that pinches:
    His Highness having liv'd so long with her, and she
    So good a lady that no tongue could ever
    Pronounce dishonour of her-by my life,
    She never knew harm-doing-O, now, after
    So many courses of the sun enthroned,
    Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which
    To leave a thousand-fold more bitter than
    'Tis sweet at first t' acquire-after this process,
    To give her the avaunt, it is a pity
    Would move a monster.
  OLD LADY. Hearts of most hard temper
    Melt and lament for her.
  ANNE. O, God's will! much better
    She ne'er had known pomp; though't be temporal,
    Yet, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce  
    It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance panging
    As soul and body's severing.
  OLD LADY. Alas, poor lady!
    She's a stranger now again.
  ANNE. So much the more
    Must pity drop upon her. Verily,
    I swear 'tis better to be lowly born
    And range with humble livers in content
    Than to be perk'd up in a glist'ring grief
    And wear a golden sorrow.
  OLD LADY. Our content
    Is our best having.
  ANNE. By my troth and maidenhead,
    I would not be a queen.
  OLD LADY. Beshrew me, I would,
    And venture maidenhead for 't; and so would you,
    For all this spice of your hypocrisy.
    You that have so fair parts of woman on you
    Have too a woman's heart, which ever yet
    Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty;  
    Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts,
    Saving your mincing, the capacity
    Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive
    If you might please to stretch it.
  ANNE. Nay, good troth.
  OLD LADY. Yes, troth and troth. You would not be a queen!
  ANNE. No, not for all the riches under heaven.
  OLD LADY. 'Tis strange: a threepence bow'd would hire me,
    Old as I am, to queen it. But, I pray you,
    What think you of a duchess? Have you limbs
    To bear that load of title?
  ANNE. No, in truth.
  OLD LADY. Then you are weakly made. Pluck off a little;
    I would not be a young count in your way
    For more than blushing comes to. If your back
    Cannot vouchsafe this burden, 'tis too weak
    Ever to get a boy.
  ANNE. How you do talk!
    I swear again I would not be a queen
    For all the world.  
  OLD LADY. In faith, for little England
    You'd venture an emballing. I myself
    Would for Carnarvonshire, although there long'd
    No more to th' crown but that. Lo, who comes here?

         Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN

  CHAMBERLAIN. Good morrow, ladies. What were't worth to know
    The secret of your conference?
  ANNE. My good lord,
    Not your demand; it values not your asking.
    Our mistress' sorrows we were pitying.
  CHAMBERLAIN. It was a gentle business and becoming
    The action of good women; there is hope
    All will be well.
  ANNE. Now, I pray God, amen!
  CHAMBERLAIN. You bear a gentle mind, and heav'nly blessings
    Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady,
    Perceive I speak sincerely and high notes
    Ta'en of your many virtues, the King's Majesty  
    Commends his good opinion of you to you, and
    Does purpose honour to you no less flowing
    Than Marchioness of Pembroke; to which tide
    A thousand pound a year, annual support,
    Out of his grace he adds.
  ANNE. I do not know
    What kind of my obedience I should tender;
    More than my all is nothing, nor my prayers
    Are not words duly hallowed, nor my wishes
    More worth than empty vanities; yet prayers and wishes
    Are all I can return. Beseech your lordship,
    Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,
    As from a blushing handmaid, to his Highness;
    Whose health and royalty I pray for.
  CHAMBERLAIN. Lady,
    I shall not fail t' approve the fair conceit
    The King hath of you.  [Aside]  I have perus'd her well:
    Beauty and honour in her are so mingled
    That they have caught the King; and who knows yet
    But from this lady may proceed a gem  
    To lighten all this isle?-I'll to the King
    And say I spoke with you.
  ANNE. My honour'd lord!                       Exit LORD CHAMBERLAIN
  OLD LADY. Why, this it is: see, see!
    I have been begging sixteen years in court-
    Am yet a courtier beggarly-nor could
    Come pat betwixt too early and too late
    For any suit of pounds; and you, O fate!
    A very fresh-fish here-fie, fie, fie upon
    This compell'd fortune!-have your mouth fill'd up
    Before you open it.
  ANNE. This is strange to me.
  OLD LADY. How tastes it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no.
    There was a lady once-'tis an old story-
    That would not be a queen, that would she not,
    For all the mud in Egypt. Have you heard it?
  ANNE. Come, you are pleasant.
  OLD LADY. With your theme I could
    O'ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
    A thousand pounds a year for pure respect!  
    No other obligation! By my life,
    That promises moe thousands: honour's train
    Is longer than his foreskirt. By this time
    I know your back will bear a duchess. Say,
    Are you not stronger than you were?
  ANNE. Good lady,
    Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,
    And leave me out on't. Would I had no being,
    If this salute my blood a jot; it faints me
    To think what follows.
    The Queen is comfortless, and we forgetful
    In our long absence. Pray, do not deliver
    What here y' have heard to her.
  OLD LADY. What do you think me?                              Exeunt




ACT II. SCENE 4.

London. A hall in Blackfriars

Trumpets, sennet, and cornets. Enter two VERGERS, with short silver wands;
next them, two SCRIBES, in the habit of doctors; after them,
the ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY alone; after him, the BISHOPS OF LINCOLN, ELY,
ROCHESTER, and SAINT ASAPH; next them, with some small distance,
follows a GENTLEMAN bearing the purse, with the great seal,
and a Cardinal's hat; then two PRIESTS, bearing each silver cross;
then a GENTLEMAN USHER bareheaded, accompanied with a SERGEANT-AT-ARMS
bearing a silver mace; then two GENTLEMEN bearing two great silver pillars;
after them, side by side, the two CARDINALS, WOLSEY and CAMPEIUS;
two NOBLEMEN with the sword and mace. Then enter the KING and QUEEN
and their trains. The KING takes place under the cloth of state;
the two CARDINALS sit under him as judges. The QUEEN takes place
some distance from the KING. The BISHOPS place themselves on each side
of the court, in manner of consistory; below them the SCRIBES.
The LORDS sit next the BISHOPS. The rest of the attendants stand
in convenient order about the stage

  WOLSEY. Whilst our commission from Rome is read,
    Let silence be commanded.
  KING. What's the need?
    It hath already publicly been read,
    And on all sides th' authority allow'd;
    You may then spare that time.
  WOLSEY. Be't so; proceed.
  SCRIBE. Say 'Henry King of England, come into the court.'
  CRIER. Henry King of England, &c.
  KING. Here.
  SCRIBE. Say 'Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.'
  CRIER. Katharine Queen of England, &c.

     The QUEEN makes no answer, rises out of her chair,
     goes about the court, comes to the KING, and kneels  
     at his feet; then speaks

  QUEEN KATHARINE. Sir, I desire you do me right and justice,
    And to bestow your pity on me; for
    I am a most poor woman and a stranger,
    Born out of your dominions, having here
    No judge indifferent, nor no more assurance
    Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir,
    In what have I offended you? What cause
    Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure
    That thus you should proceed to put me of
    And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness,
    I have been to you a true and humble wife,
    At all times to your will conformable,
    Ever in fear to kindle your dislike,
    Yea, subject to your countenance-glad or sorry
    As I saw it inclin'd. When was the hour
    I ever contradicted your desire
    Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends
    Have I not strove to love, although I knew  
    He were mine enemy? What friend of mine
    That had to him deriv'd your anger did
    Continue in my liking? Nay, gave notice
    He was from thence discharg'd? Sir, call to mind
    That I have been your wife in this obedience
    Upward of twenty years, and have been blest
    With many children by you. If, in the course
    And process of this time, you can report,
    And prove it too against mine honour, aught,
    My bond to wedlock or my love and duty,
    Against your sacred person, in God's name,
    Turn me away and let the foul'st contempt
    Shut door upon me, and so give me up
    To the sharp'st kind of justice. Please you, sir,
    The King, your father, was reputed for
    A prince most prudent, of an excellent
    And unmatch'd wit and judgment; Ferdinand,
    My father, King of Spain, was reckon'd one
    The wisest prince that there had reign'd by many
    A year before. It is not to be question'd  
    That they had gather'd a wise council to them
    Of every realm, that did debate this business,
    Who deem'd our marriage lawful. Wherefore I humbly
    Beseech you, sir, to spare me till I may
    Be by my friends in Spain advis'd, whose counsel
    I will implore. If not, i' th' name of God,
    Your pleasure be fulfill'd!
  WOLSEY. You have here, lady,
    And of your choice, these reverend fathers-men
    Of singular integrity and learning,
    Yea, the elect o' th' land, who are assembled
    To plead your cause. It shall be therefore bootless
    That longer you desire the court, as well
    For your own quiet as to rectify
    What is unsettled in the King.
  CAMPEIUS. His Grace
    Hath spoken well and justly; therefore, madam,
    It's fit this royal session do proceed
    And that, without delay, their arguments
    Be now produc'd and heard.  
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Lord Cardinal,
    To you I speak.
  WOLSEY. Your pleasure, madam?
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Sir,
    I am about to weep; but, thinking that
    We are a queen, or long have dream'd so, certain
    The daughter of a king, my drops of tears
    I'll turn to sparks of fire.
  WOLSEY. Be patient yet.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. I Will, when you are humble; nay, before
    Or God will punish me. I do believe,
    Induc'd by potent circumstances, that
    You are mine enemy, and make my challenge
    You shall not be my judge; for it is you
    Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me-
    Which God's dew quench! Therefore I say again,
    I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul
    Refuse you for my judge, whom yet once more
    I hold my most malicious foe and think not
    At all a friend to truth.  
  WOLSEY. I do profess
    You speak not like yourself, who ever yet
    Have stood to charity and display'd th' effects
    Of disposition gentle and of wisdom
    O'ertopping woman's pow'r. Madam, you do me wrong:
    I have no spleen against you, nor injustice
    For you or any; how far I have proceeded,
    Or how far further shall, is warranted
    By a commission from the Consistory,
    Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me
    That I have blown this coal: I do deny it.
    The King is present; if it be known to him
    That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound,
    And worthily, my falsehood! Yea, as much
    As you have done my truth. If he know
    That I am free of your report, he knows
    I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him
    It lies to cure me, and the cure is to
    Remove these thoughts from you; the which before
    His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech  
    You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking
    And to say so no more.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. My lord, my lord,
    I am a simple woman, much too weak
    T' oppose your cunning. Y'are meek and humble-mouth'd;
    You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,
    With meekness and humility; but your heart
    Is cramm'd with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.
    You have, by fortune and his Highness' favours,
    Gone slightly o'er low steps, and now are mounted
    Where pow'rs are your retainers, and your words,
    Domestics to you, serve your will as't please
    Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you
    You tender more your person's honour than
    Your high profession spiritual; that again
    I do refuse you for my judge and here,
    Before you all, appeal unto the Pope,
    To bring my whole cause 'fore his Holiness
    And to be judg'd by him.
                     [She curtsies to the KING, and offers to depart]  
  CAMPEIUS. The Queen is obstinate,
    Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and
    Disdainful to be tried by't; 'tis not well.
    She's going away.
  KING. Call her again.
  CRIER. Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
  GENTLEMAN USHER. Madam, you are call'd back.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. What need you note it? Pray you keep your way;
    When you are call'd, return. Now the Lord help!
    They vex me past my patience. Pray you pass on.
    I will not tarry; no, nor ever more
    Upon this business my appearance make
    In any of their courts.           Exeunt QUEEN and her attendants
  KING. Go thy ways, Kate.
    That man i' th' world who shall report he has
    A better wife, let him in nought be trusted
    For speaking false in that. Thou art, alone-
    If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
    Thy meekness saint-like, wife-like government,
    Obeying in commanding, and thy parts  
    Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out-
    The queen of earthly queens. She's noble born;
    And like her true nobility she has
    Carried herself towards me.
  WOLSEY. Most gracious sir,
    In humblest manner I require your Highness
    That it shall please you to declare in hearing
    Of all these ears-for where I am robb'd and bound,
    There must I be unloos'd, although not there
    At once and fully satisfied-whether ever I
    Did broach this business to your Highness, or
    Laid any scruple in your way which might
    Induce you to the question on't, or ever
    Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
    A royal lady, spake one the least word that might
    Be to the prejudice of her present state,
    Or touch of her good person?
  KING. My Lord Cardinal,
    I do excuse you; yea, upon mine honour,
    I free you from't. You are not to be taught  
    That you have many enemies that know not
    Why they are so, but, like to village curs,
    Bark when their fellows do. By some of these
    The Queen is put in anger. Y'are excus'd.
    But will you be more justified? You ever
    Have wish'd the sleeping of this business; never desir'd
    It to be stirr'd; but oft have hind'red, oft,
    The passages made toward it. On my honour,
    I speak my good Lord Cardinal to this point,
    And thus far clear him. Now, what mov'd me to't,
    I will be bold with time and your attention.
    Then mark th' inducement. Thus it came-give heed to't:
    My conscience first receiv'd a tenderness,
    Scruple, and prick, on certain speeches utter'd
    By th' Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,
    Who had been hither sent on the debating
    A marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and
    Our daughter Mary. I' th' progress of this business,
    Ere a determinate resolution, he-
    I mean the Bishop-did require a respite  
    Wherein he might the King his lord advertise
    Whether our daughter were legitimate,
    Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,
    Sometimes our brother's wife. This respite shook
    The bosom of my conscience, enter'd me,
    Yea, with a splitting power, and made to tremble
    The region of my breast, which forc'd such way
    That many maz'd considerings did throng
    And press'd in with this caution. First, methought
    I stood not in the smile of heaven, who had
    Commanded nature that my lady's womb,
    If it conceiv'd a male child by me, should
    Do no more offices of life to't than
    The grave does to the dead; for her male issue
    Or died where they were made, or shortly after
    This world had air'd them. Hence I took a thought
    This was a judgment on me, that my kingdom,
    Well worthy the best heir o' th' world, should not
    Be gladded in't by me. Then follows that
    I weigh'd the danger which my realms stood in  
    By this my issue's fail, and that gave to me
    Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in
    The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer
    Toward this remedy, whereupon we are
    Now present here together; that's to say
    I meant to rectify my conscience, which
    I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,
    By all the reverend fathers of the land
    And doctors learn'd. First, I began in private
    With you, my Lord of Lincoln; you remember
    How under my oppression I did reek,
    When I first mov'd you.
  LINCOLN. Very well, my liege.
  KING. I have spoke long; be pleas'd yourself to say
    How far you satisfied me.
  LINCOLN. So please your Highness,
    The question did at first so stagger me-
    Bearing a state of mighty moment in't
    And consequence of dread-that I committed
    The daring'st counsel which I had to doubt,  
    And did entreat your Highness to this course
    Which you are running here.
  KING. I then mov'd you,
    My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave
    To make this present summons. Unsolicited
    I left no reverend person in this court,
    But by particular consent proceeded
    Under your hands and seals; therefore, go on,
    For no dislike i' th' world against the person
    Of the good Queen, but the sharp thorny points
    Of my alleged reasons, drives this forward.
    Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life
    And kingly dignity, we are contented
    To wear our moral state to come with her,
    Katharine our queen, before the primest creature
    That's paragon'd o' th' world.
  CAMPEIUS. So please your Highness,
    The Queen being absent, 'tis a needful fitness
    That we adjourn this court till further day;
    Meanwhile must be an earnest motion  
    Made to the Queen to call back her appeal
    She intends unto his Holiness.
  KING.  [Aside]  I may perceive
    These cardinals trifle with me. I abhor
    This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.
    My learn'd and well-beloved servant, Cranmer,
    Prithee return. With thy approach I know
    My comfort comes along. -Break up the court;
    I say, set on.                   Exuent in manner as they entered




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE 1.

London. The QUEEN'S apartments

Enter the QUEEN and her women, as at work

  QUEEN KATHARINE. Take thy lute, wench. My soul grows
      sad with troubles;
    Sing and disperse 'em, if thou canst. Leave working.

                    SONG

        Orpheus with his lute made trees,
        And the mountain tops that freeze,
          Bow themselves when he did sing;
        To his music plants and flowers
        Ever sprung, as sun and showers
          There had made a lasting spring.

        Every thing that heard him play,
        Even the billows of the sea,
          Hung their heads and then lay by.  
        In sweet music is such art,
        Killing care and grief of heart
          Fall asleep or hearing die.

              Enter a GENTLEMAN

  QUEEN KATHARINE. How now?
  GENTLEMAN. An't please your Grace, the two great Cardinals
    Wait in the presence.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Would they speak with me?
  GENTLEMAN. They will'd me say so, madam.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Pray their Graces
    To come near. [Exit GENTLEMAN] What can be their business
    With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favour?
    I do not like their coming. Now I think on't,
    They should be good men, their affairs as righteous;
    But all hoods make not monks.

         Enter the two CARDINALS, WOLSEY and CAMPEIUS
  
  WOLSEY. Peace to your Highness!
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Your Graces find me here part of housewife;
    I would be all, against the worst may happen.
    What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?
  WOLSEY. May it please you, noble madam, to withdraw
    Into your private chamber, we shall give you
    The full cause of our coming.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Speak it here;
    There's nothing I have done yet, o' my conscience,
    Deserves a corner. Would all other women
    Could speak this with as free a soul as I do!
    My lords, I care not-so much I am happy
    Above a number-if my actions
    Were tried by ev'ry tongue, ev'ry eye saw 'em,
    Envy and base opinion set against 'em,
    I know my life so even. If your business
    Seek me out, and that way I am wife in,
    Out with it boldly; truth loves open dealing.
  WOLSEY. Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, regina serenis-sima-
  QUEEN KATHARINE. O, good my lord, no Latin!  
    I am not such a truant since my coming,
    As not to know the language I have liv'd in;
    A strange tongue makes my cause more strange, suspicious;
    Pray speak in English. Here are some will thank you,
    If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake:
    Believe me, she has had much wrong. Lord Cardinal,
    The willing'st sin I ever yet committed
    May be absolv'd in English.
  WOLSEY. Noble lady,
    I am sorry my integrity should breed,
    And service to his Majesty and you,
    So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant
    We come not by the way of accusation
    To taint that honour every good tongue blesses,
    Nor to betray you any way to sorrow-
    You have too much, good lady; but to know
    How you stand minded in the weighty difference
    Between the King and you, and to deliver,
    Like free and honest men, our just opinions
    And comforts to your cause.  
  CAMPEIUS. Most honour'd madam,
    My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,
    Zeal and obedience he still bore your Grace,
    Forgetting, like a good man, your late censure
    Both of his truth and him-which was too far-
    Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,
    His service and his counsel.
  QUEEN KATHARINE.  [Aside]  To betray me.-
    My lords, I thank you both for your good wins;
    Ye speak like honest men-pray God ye prove so!
    But how to make ye suddenly an answer,
    In such a point of weight, so near mine honour,
    More near my life, I fear, with my weak wit,
    And to such men of gravity and learning,
    In truth I know not. I was set at work
    Among my maids, full little, God knows, looking
    Either for such men or such business.
    For her sake that I have been-for I feel
    The last fit of my greatness-good your Graces,
    Let me have time and counsel for my cause.  
    Alas, I am a woman, friendless, hopeless!
  WOLSEY. Madam, you wrong the King's love with these fears;
    Your hopes and friends are infinite.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. In England
    But little for my profit; can you think, lords,
    That any Englishman dare give me counsel?
    Or be a known friend, 'gainst his Highness' pleasure-
    Though he be grown so desperate to be honest-
    And live a subject? Nay, forsooth, my friends,
    They that must weigh out my afflictions,
    They that my trust must grow to, live not here;
    They are, as all my other comforts, far hence,
    In mine own country, lords.
  CAMPEIUS. I would your Grace
    Would leave your griefs, and take my counsel.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. How, sir?
  CAMPEIUS. Put your main cause into the King's protection;
    He's loving and most gracious. 'Twill be much
    Both for your honour better and your cause;
    For if the trial of the law o'ertake ye  
    You'll part away disgrac'd.
  WOLSEY. He tells you rightly.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Ye tell me what ye wish for both-my ruin.
    Is this your Christian counsel? Out upon ye!
    Heaven is above all yet: there sits a Judge
    That no king can corrupt.
  CAMPEIUS. Your rage mistakes us.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. The more shame for ye; holy men I thought ye,
    Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues;
    But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear ye.
    Mend 'em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort?
    The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady-
    A woman lost among ye, laugh'd at, scorn'd?
    I will not wish ye half my miseries:
    I have more charity; but say I warned ye.
    Take heed, for heaven's sake take heed, lest at once
    The burden of my sorrows fall upon ye.
  WOLSEY. Madam, this is a mere distraction;
    You turn the good we offer into envy.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Ye turn me into nothing. Woe upon ye,  
    And all such false professors! Would you have me-
    If you have any justice, any pity,
    If ye be any thing but churchmen's habits-
    Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me?
    Alas! has banish'd me his bed already,
    His love too long ago! I am old, my lords,
    And all the fellowship I hold now with him
    Is only my obedience. What can happen
    To me above this wretchedness? All your studies
    Make me a curse like this.
  CAMPEIUS. Your fears are worse.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Have I liv'd thus long-let me speak myself,
    Since virtue finds no friends-a wife, a true one?
    A woman, I dare say without vain-glory,
    Never yet branded with suspicion?
    Have I with all my full affections
    Still met the King, lov'd him next heav'n, obey'd him,
    Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him,
    Almost forgot my prayers to content him,
    And am I thus rewarded? 'Tis not well, lords.  
    Bring me a constant woman to her husband,
    One that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure,
    And to that woman, when she has done most,
    Yet will I add an honour-a great patience.
  WOLSEY. Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty,
    To give up willingly that noble title
    Your master wed me to: nothing but death
    Shall e'er divorce my dignities.
  WOLSEY. Pray hear me.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Would I had never trod this English earth,
    Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!
    Ye have angels' faces, but heaven knows your hearts.
    What will become of me now, wretched lady?
    I am the most unhappy woman living.
    [To her WOMEN]  Alas, poor wenches, where are now
      your fortunes?
    Shipwreck'd upon a kingdom, where no pity,
    No friends, no hope; no kindred weep for me;
    Almost no grave allow'd me. Like the My,  
    That once was mistress of the field, and flourish'd,
    I'll hang my head and perish.
  WOLSEY. If your Grace
    Could but be brought to know our ends are honest,
    You'd feel more comfort. Why should we, good lady,
    Upon what cause, wrong you? Alas, our places,
    The way of our profession is against it;
    We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.
    For goodness' sake, consider what you do;
    How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly
    Grow from the King's acquaintance, by this carriage.
    The hearts of princes kiss obedience,
    So much they love it; but to stubborn spirits
    They swell and grow as terrible as storms.
    I know you have a gentle, noble temper,
    A soul as even as a calm. Pray think us
    Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and servants.
  CAMPEIUS. Madam, you'll find it so. You wrong your virtues
    With these weak women's fears. A noble spirit,
    As yours was put into you, ever casts  
    Such doubts as false coin from it. The King loves you;
    Beware you lose it not. For us, if you please
    To trust us in your business, we are ready
    To use our utmost studies in your service.
  QUEEN KATHARINE. Do what ye will my lords; and pray
      forgive me
    If I have us'd myself unmannerly;
    You know I am a woman, lacking wit
    To make a seemly answer to such persons.
    Pray do my service to his Majesty;
    He has my heart yet, and shall have my prayers
    While I shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers,
    Bestow your counsels on me; she now begs
    That little thought, when she set footing here,
    She should have bought her dignities so dear.              Exeunt



ACT III.SCENE 2.

London. The palace

Enter the DUKE OF NORFOLK, the DUKE OF SUFFOLK, the EARL OF SURREY,
and the LORD CHAMBERLAIN

  NORFOLK. If you will now unite in your complaints
    And force them with a constancy, the Cardinal
    Cannot stand under them: if you omit
    The offer of this time, I cannot promise
    But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces
    With these you bear already.
  SURREY. I am joyful
    To meet the least occasion that may give me
    Remembrance of my father-in-law, the Duke,
    To be reveng'd on him.
  SUFFOLK. Which of the peers
    Have uncontemn'd gone by him, or at least
    Strangely neglected? When did he regard
    The stamp of nobleness in any person
    Out of himself?  
  CHAMBERLAIN. My lords, you speak your pleasures.
    What he deserves of you and me I know;
    What we can do to him-though now the time
    Gives way to us-I much fear. If you cannot
    Bar his access to th' King, never attempt
    Anything on him; for he hath a witchcraft
    Over the King in's tongue.
  NORFOLK. O, fear him not!
    His spell in that is out; the King hath found
    Matter against him that for ever mars
    The honey of his language. No, he's settled,
    Not to come off, in his displeasure.
  SURREY. Sir,
    I should be glad to hear such news as this
    Once every hour.
  NORFOLK. Believe it, this is true:
    In the divorce his contrary proceedings
    Are all unfolded; wherein he appears
    As I would wish mine enemy.
  SURREY. How came  
    His practices to light?
  SUFFOLK. Most Strangely.
  SURREY. O, how, how?
  SUFFOLK. The Cardinal's letters to the Pope miscarried,
    And came to th' eye o' th' King; wherein was read
    How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
    To stay the judgment o' th' divorce; for if
    It did take place, 'I do' quoth he 'perceive
    My king is tangled in affection to
    A creature of the Queen's, Lady Anne Bullen.'
  SURREY. Has the King this?
  SUFFOLK. Believe it.
  SURREY. Will this work?
  CHAMBERLAIN. The King in this perceives him how he coasts
    And hedges his own way. But in this point
    All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic
    After his patient's death: the King already
    Hath married the fair lady.
  SURREY. Would he had!
  SUFFOLK. May you be happy in your wish, my lord!  
    For, I profess, you have it.
  SURREY. Now, all my joy
    Trace the conjunction!
  SUFFOLK. My amen to't!
  NORFOLK. An men's!
  SUFFOLK. There's order given for her coronation;
    Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left
    To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords,
    She is a gallant creature, and complete
    In mind and feature. I persuade me from her
    Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall
    In it be memoriz'd.
  SURREY. But will the King
    Digest this letter of the Cardinal's?
    The Lord forbid!
  NORFOLK. Marry, amen!
  SUFFOLK. No, no;
    There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose
    Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius
    Is stol'n away to Rome; hath ta'en no leave;  
    Has left the cause o' th' King unhandled, and
    Is posted, as the agent of our Cardinal,
    To second all his plot. I do assure you
    The King cried 'Ha!' at this.
  CHAMBERLAIN. Now, God incense him,
    And let him cry 'Ha!' louder!
  NORFOLK. But, my lord,
    When returns Cranmer?
  SUFFOLK. He is return'd in his opinions; which
    Have satisfied the King for his divorce,
    Together with all famous colleges
    Almost in Christendom. Shortly, I believe,
    His second marriage shall be publish'd, and
    Her coronation. Katharine no more
    Shall be call'd queen, but princess dowager
    And widow to Prince Arthur.
  NORFOLK. This same Cranmer's
    A worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much pain
    In the King's business.
  SUFFOLK. He has; and we shall see him  
    For it an archbishop.
  NORFOLK. So I hear.
  SUFFOLK. 'Tis so.

        Enter WOLSEY and CROMWELL

    The Cardinal!
  NORFOLK. Observe, observe, he's moody.
  WOLSEY. The packet, Cromwell,
    Gave't you the King?
  CROMWELL. To his own hand, in's bedchamber.
  WOLSEY. Look'd he o' th' inside of the paper?
  CROMWELL. Presently
    He did unseal them; and the first he view'd,
    He did it with a serious mind; a heed
    Was in his countenance. You he bade
    Attend him here this morning.
  WOLSEY. Is he ready
    To come abroad?
  CROMWELL. I think by this he is.  
  WOLSEY. Leave me awhile.                              Exit CROMWELL
    [Aside]  It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,
    The French King's sister; he shall marry her.
    Anne Bullen! No, I'll no Anne Bullens for him;
    There's more in't than fair visage. Bullen!
    No, we'll no Bullens. Speedily I wish
    To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
  NORFOLK. He's discontented.
  SUFFOLK. May be he hears the King
    Does whet his anger to him.
  SURREY. Sharp enough,
    Lord, for thy justice!
  WOLSEY.  [Aside]  The late Queen's gentlewoman, a knight's
      daughter,
    To be her mistress' mistress! The Queen's queen!
    This candle burns not clear. 'Tis I must snuff it;
    Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous
    And well deserving? Yet I know her for
    A spleeny Lutheran; and not wholesome to
    Our cause that she should lie i' th' bosom of  
    Our hard-rul'd King. Again, there is sprung up
    An heretic, an arch one, Cranmer; one
    Hath crawl'd into the favour of the King,
    And is his oracle.
  NORFOLK. He is vex'd at something.

        Enter the KING, reading of a schedule, and LOVELL

  SURREY. I would 'twere something that would fret the string,
    The master-cord on's heart!
  SUFFOLK. The King, the King!
  KING. What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
    To his own portion! And what expense by th' hour
    Seems to flow from him! How, i' th' name of thrift,
    Does he rake this together?-Now, my lords,
    Saw you the Cardinal?
  NORFOLK. My lord, we have
    Stood here observing him. Some strange commotion
    Is in his brain: he bites his lip and starts,
    Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,  
    Then lays his finger on his temple; straight
    Springs out into fast gait; then stops again,
    Strikes his breast hard; and anon he casts
    His eye against the moon. In most strange postures
    We have seen him set himself.
  KING. It may well be
    There is a mutiny in's mind. This morning
    Papers of state he sent me to peruse,
    As I requir'd; and wot you what I found
    There-on my conscience, put unwittingly?
    Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing
    The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,
    Rich stuffs, and ornaments of household; which
    I find at such proud rate that it outspeaks
    Possession of a subject.
  NORFOLK. It's heaven's will;
    Some spirit put this paper in the packet
    To bless your eye withal.
  KING. If we did think
    His contemplation were above the earth  
    And fix'd on spiritual object, he should still
    dwell in his musings; but I am afraid
    His thinkings are below the moon, not worth
    His serious considering.
                        [The KING takes his seat and whispers LOVELL,
                                           who goes to the CARDINAL]
  WOLSEY. Heaven forgive me!
    Ever God bless your Highness!
  KING. Good, my lord,
    You are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the inventory
    Of your best graces in your mind; the which
    You were now running o'er. You have scarce time
    To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span
    To keep your earthly audit; sure, in that
    I deem you an ill husband, and am glad
    To have you therein my companion.
  WOLSEY. Sir,
    For holy offices I have a time; a time
    To think upon the part of business which
    I bear i' th' state; and nature does require  
    Her times of preservation, which perforce
    I, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal,
    Must give my tendance to.
  KING. You have said well.
  WOLSEY. And ever may your Highness yoke together,
    As I will lend you cause, my doing well
    With my well saying!
  KING. 'Tis well said again;
    And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well;
    And yet words are no deeds. My father lov'd you:
    He said he did; and with his deed did crown
    His word upon you. Since I had my office
    I have kept you next my heart; have not alone
    Employ'd you where high profits might come home,
    But par'd my present havings to bestow
    My bounties upon you.
  WOLSEY.  [Aside]  What should this mean?
  SURREY.  [Aside]  The Lord increase this business!
  KING. Have I not made you
    The prime man of the state? I pray you tell me  
    If what I now pronounce you have found true;
    And, if you may confess it, say withal
    If you are bound to us or no. What say you?
  WOLSEY. My sovereign, I confess your royal graces,
    Show'r'd on me daily, have been more than could
    My studied purposes requite; which went
    Beyond all man's endeavours. My endeavours,
    Have ever come too short of my desires,
    Yet fil'd with my abilities; mine own ends
    Have been mine so that evermore they pointed
    To th' good of your most sacred person and
    The profit of the state. For your great graces
    Heap'd upon me, poor undeserver, I
    Can nothing render but allegiant thanks;
    My pray'rs to heaven for you; my loyalty,
    Which ever has and ever shall be growing,
    Till death, that winter, kill it.
  KING. Fairly answer'd!
    A loyal and obedient subject is
    Therein illustrated; the honour of it  
    Does pay the act of it, as, i' th' contrary,
    The foulness is the punishment. I presume
    That, as my hand has open'd bounty to you,
    My heart dropp'd love, my pow'r rain'd honour, more
    On you than any, so your hand and heart,
    Your brain, and every function of your power,
    Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,
    As 'twere in love's particular, be more
    To me, your friend, than any.
  WOLSEY. I do profess
    That for your Highness' good I ever labour'd
    More than mine own; that am, have, and will be-
    Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
    And throw it from their soul; though perils did
    Abound as thick as thought could make 'em, and
    Appear in forms more horrid-yet my duty,
    As doth a rock against the chiding flood,
    Should the approach of this wild river break,
    And stand unshaken yours.
  KING. 'Tis nobly spoken.  
    Take notice, lords, he has a loyal breast,
    For you have seen him open 't. Read o'er this;
                                                  [Giving him papers]
    And after, this; and then to breakfast with
    What appetite you have.
                Exit the KING, frowning upon the CARDINAL; the NOBLES
                             throng after him, smiling and whispering
  WOLSEY. What should this mean?
    What sudden anger's this? How have I reap'd it?
    He parted frowning from me, as if ruin
    Leap'd from his eyes; so looks the chafed lion
    Upon the daring huntsman that has gall'd him-
    Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper;
    I fear, the story of his anger. 'Tis so;
    This paper has undone me. 'Tis th' account
    Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together
    For mine own ends; indeed to gain the popedom,
    And fee my friends in Rome. O negligence,
    Fit for a fool to fall by! What cross devil
    Made me put this main secret in the packet  
    I sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?
    No new device to beat this from his brains?
    I know 'twill stir him strongly; yet I know
    A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune,
    Will bring me off again. What's this? 'To th' Pope.'
    The letter, as I live, with all the business
    I writ to's Holiness. Nay then, farewell!
    I have touch'd the highest point of all my greatness,
    And from that full meridian of my glory
    I haste now to my setting. I shall fall
    Like a bright exhalation in the evening,
    And no man see me more.

        Re-enter to WOLSEY the DUKES OF NORFOLK and
        SUFFOLK, the EARL OF SURREY, and the LORD
        CHAMBERLAIN

  NORFOLK. Hear the King's pleasure, Cardinal, who commands you
    To render up the great seal presently
    Into our hands, and to confine yourself  
    To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester's,
    Till you hear further from his Highness.
  WOLSEY. Stay:
    Where's your commission, lords? Words cannot carry
    Authority so weighty.
  SUFFOLK. Who dares cross 'em,
    Bearing the King's will from his mouth expressly?
  WOLSEY. Till I find more than will or words to do it-
    I mean your malice-know, officious lords,
    I dare and must deny it. Now I feel
    Of what coarse metal ye are moulded-envy;
    How eagerly ye follow my disgraces,
    As if it fed ye; and how sleek and wanton
    Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin!
    Follow your envious courses, men of malice;
    You have Christian warrant for 'em, and no doubt
    In time will find their fit rewards. That seal
    You ask with such a violence, the King-
    Mine and your master-with his own hand gave me;
    Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours,  
    During my life; and, to confirm his goodness,
    Tied it by letters-patents. Now, who'll take it?
  SURREY. The King, that gave it.
  WOLSEY. It must be himself then.
  SURREY. Thou art a proud traitor, priest.
  WOLSEY. Proud lord, thou liest.
    Within these forty hours Surrey durst better
    Have burnt that tongue than said so.
  SURREY. Thy ambition,
    Thou scarlet sin, robb'd this bewailing land
    Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law.
    The heads of all thy brother cardinals,
    With thee and all thy best parts bound together,
    Weigh'd not a hair of his. Plague of your policy!
    You sent me deputy for Ireland;
    Far from his succour, from the King, from all
    That might have mercy on the fault thou gav'st him;
    Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity,
    Absolv'd him with an axe.
  WOLSEY. This, and all else  
    This talking lord can lay upon my credit,
    I answer is most false. The Duke by law
    Found his deserts; how innocent I was
    From any private malice in his end,
    His noble jury and foul cause can witness.
    If I lov'd many words, lord, I should tell you
    You have as little honesty as honour,
    That in the way of loyalty and truth
    Toward the King, my ever royal master,
    Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be
    And an that love his follies.
  SURREY. By my soul,
    Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou shouldst feel
    My sword i' the life-blood of thee else. My lords
    Can ye endure to hear this arrogance?
    And from this fellow? If we live thus tamely,
    To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,
    Farewell nobility! Let his Grace go forward
    And dare us with his cap like larks.
  WOLSEY. All goodness  
    Is poison to thy stomach.
  SURREY. Yes, that goodness
    Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
    Into your own hands, Cardinal, by extortion;
    The goodness of your intercepted packets
    You writ to th' Pope against the King; your goodness,
    Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.
    My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly noble,
    As you respect the common good, the state
    Of our despis'd nobility, our issues,
    Whom, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen-
    Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles
    Collected from his life. I'll startle you
    Worse than the sacring bell, when the brown wench
    Lay kissing in your arms, Lord Cardinal.
  WOLSEY. How much, methinks, I could despise this man,
    But that I am bound in charity against it!
  NORFOLK. Those articles, my lord, are in the King's hand;
    But, thus much, they are foul ones.
  WOLSEY. So much fairer  
    And spotless shall mine innocence arise,
    When the King knows my truth.
  SURREY. This cannot save you.
    I thank my memory I yet remember
    Some of these articles; and out they shall.
    Now, if you can blush and cry guilty, Cardinal,
    You'll show a little honesty.
  WOLSEY. Speak on, sir;
    I dare your worst objections. If I blush,
    It is to see a nobleman want manners.
  SURREY. I had rather want those than my head. Have at you!
    First, that without the King's assent or knowledge
    You wrought to be a legate; by which power
    You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops.
  NORFOLK. Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else
    To foreign princes, 'Ego et Rex meus'
    Was still inscrib'd; in which you brought the King
    To be your servant.
  SUFFOLK. Then, that without the knowledge
    Either of King or Council, when you went  
    Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
    To carry into Flanders the great seal.
  SURREY. Item, you sent a large commission
    To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,
    Without the King's will or the state's allowance,
    A league between his Highness and Ferrara.
  SUFFOLK. That out of mere ambition you have caus'd
    Your holy hat to be stamp'd on the King's coin.
  SURREY. Then, that you have sent innumerable substance,
    By what means got I leave to your own conscience,
    To furnish Rome and to prepare the ways
    You have for dignities, to the mere undoing
    Of all the kingdom. Many more there are,
    Which, since they are of you, and odious,
    I will not taint my mouth with.
  CHAMBERLAIN. O my lord,
    Press not a falling man too far! 'Tis virtue.
    His faults lie open to the laws; let them,
    Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him
    So little of his great self.  
  SURREY. I forgive him.
  SUFFOLK. Lord Cardinal, the King's further pleasure is-
    Because all those things you have done of late,
    By your power legatine within this kingdom,
    Fall into th' compass of a praemunire-
    That therefore such a writ be sued against you:
    To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
    Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be
    Out of the King's protection. This is my charge.
  NORFOLK. And so we'll leave you to your meditations
    How to live better. For your stubborn answer
    About the giving back the great seal to us,
    The King shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank you.
    So fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.
                                                Exeunt all but WOLSEY
  WOLSEY. So farewell to the little good you bear me.
    Farewell, a long farewell, to all my greatness!
    This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
    The tender leaves of hopes; to-morrow blossoms
    And bears his blushing honours thick upon him;  
    The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
    And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
    His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,
    And then he falls, as I do. I have ventur'd,
    Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
    This many summers in a sea of glory;
    But far beyond my depth. My high-blown pride
    At length broke under me, and now has left me,
    Weary and old with service, to the mercy
    Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.
    Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye;
    I feel my heart new open'd. O, how wretched
    Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favours!
    There is betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
    That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin
    More pangs and fears than wars or women have;
    And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
    Never to hope again.

         Enter CROMWELL, standing amazed  

    Why, how now, Cromwell!
  CROMWELL. I have no power to speak, sir.
  WOLSEY. What, amaz'd
    At my misfortunes? Can thy spirit wonder
    A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep,
    I am fall'n indeed.
  CROMWELL. How does your Grace?
  WOLSEY. Why, well;
    Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
    I know myself now, and I feel within me
    A peace above all earthly dignities,
    A still and quiet conscience. The King has cur'd me,
    I humbly thank his Grace; and from these shoulders,
    These ruin'd pillars, out of pity, taken
    A load would sink a navy-too much honour.
    O, 'tis a burden, Cromwell, 'tis a burden
    Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!
  CROMWELL. I am glad your Grace has made that right use of it.
  WOLSEY. I hope I have. I am able now, methinks,  
    Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
    To endure more miseries and greater far
    Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.
    What news abroad?
  CROMWELL. The heaviest and the worst
    Is your displeasure with the King.
  WOLSEY. God bless him!
  CROMWELL. The next is that Sir Thomas More is chosen
    Lord Chancellor in your place.
  WOLSEY. That's somewhat sudden.
    But he's a learned man. May he continue
    Long in his Highness' favour, and do justice
    For truth's sake and his conscience; that his bones
    When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,
    May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on him!
    What more?
  CROMWELL. That Cranmer is return'd with welcome,
    Install'd Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
  WOLSEY. That's news indeed.
  CROMWELL. Last, that the Lady Anne,  
    Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,
    This day was view'd in open as his queen,
    Going to chapel; and the voice is now
    Only about her coronation.
  WOLSEY. There was the weight that pull'd me down.
      O Cromwell,
    The King has gone beyond me. All my glories
    In that one woman I have lost for ever.
    No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours,
    Or gild again the noble troops that waited
    Upon my smiles. Go get thee from me, Cromwell;
    I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now
    To be thy lord and master. Seek the King;
    That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
    What and how true thou art. He will advance thee;
    Some little memory of me will stir him-
    I know his noble nature-not to let
    Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell,
    Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
    For thine own future safety.  
  CROMWELL. O my lord,
    Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
    So good, so noble, and so true a master?
    Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
    With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.
    The King shall have my service; but my prayers
    For ever and for ever shall be yours.
  WOLSEY. Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
    In all my miseries; but thou hast forc'd me,
    Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
    Let's dry our eyes; and thus far hear me, Cromwell,
    And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
    And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
    Of me more must be heard of, say I taught thee-
    Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory,
    And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour,
    Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in-
    A sure and safe one, though thy master miss'd it.
    Mark but my fall and that that ruin'd me.
    Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:  
    By that sin fell the angels. How can man then,
    The image of his Maker, hope to win by it?
    Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee;
    Corruption wins not more than honesty.
    Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace
    To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not;
    Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
    Thy God's, and truth's; then, if thou fall'st, O Cromwell,
    Thou fall'st a blessed martyr!
    Serve the King, and-prithee lead me in.
    There take an inventory of all I have
    To the last penny; 'tis the King's. My robe,
    And my integrity to heaven, is all
    I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell!
    Had I but serv'd my God with half the zeal
    I serv'd my King, he would not in mine age
    Have left me naked to mine enemies.
  CROMWELL. Good sir, have patience.
  WOLSEY. So I have. Farewell
    The hopes of court! My hopes in heaven do dwell.           Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE 1.

A street in Westminster

Enter two GENTLEMEN, meeting one another

  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Y'are well met once again.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. So are you.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. You come to take your stand here, and
      behold
    The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. 'Tis all my business. At our last encounter
    The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. 'Tis very true. But that time offer'd
      sorrow;
    This, general joy.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. 'Tis well. The citizens,
    I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds-
    As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward-
    In celebration of this day with shows,
    Pageants, and sights of honour.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Never greater,  
    Nor, I'll assure you, better taken, sir.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. May I be bold to ask what that contains,
    That paper in your hand?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Yes; 'tis the list
    Of those that claim their offices this day,
    By custom of the coronation.
    The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
    To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,
    He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I thank you, sir; had I not known
      those customs,
    I should have been beholding to your paper.
    But, I beseech you, what's become of Katharine,
    The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
    Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
    Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
    Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles of
    From Ampthill, where the Princess lay; to which
    She was often cited by them, but appear'd not.  
    And, to be short, for not appearance and
    The King's late scruple, by the main assent
    Of all these learned men, she was divorc'd,
    And the late marriage made of none effect;
    Since which she was removed to Kimbolton,
    Where she remains now sick.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Alas, good lady!                       [Trumpets]
    The trumpets sound. Stand close, the Queen is coming.
[Hautboys]

              THE ORDER OF THE CORONATION.

    1. A lively flourish of trumpets.
    2. Then two JUDGES.
    3. LORD CHANCELLOR, with purse and mace before him.
    4. CHORISTERS singing.                                    [Music]
    5. MAYOR OF LONDON, bearing the mace. Then GARTER, in
       his coat of arms, and on his head he wore a gilt copper
       crown.
    6. MARQUIS DORSET, bearing a sceptre of gold, on his head a  
       demi-coronal of gold. With him, the EARL OF SURREY,
       bearing the rod of silver with the dove, crowned with an
       earl's coronet. Collars of Esses.
    7. DUKE OF SUFFOLK, in his robe of estate, his coronet on
       his head, bearing a long white wand, as High Steward.
       With him, the DUKE OF NORFOLK, with the rod of
       marshalship, a coronet on his head. Collars of Esses.
    8. A canopy borne by four of the CINQUE-PORTS; under it
       the QUEEN in her robe; in her hair richly adorned with
       pearl, crowned. On each side her, the BISHOPS OF LONDON
       and WINCHESTER.
    9. The old DUCHESS OF NORFOLK, in a coronal of gold
       wrought with flowers, bearing the QUEEN'S train.
   10. Certain LADIES or COUNTESSES, with plain circlets of gold
       without flowers.

             Exeunt, first passing over the stage in order and state,
                                and then a great flourish of trumpets

  SECOND GENTLEMAN. A royal train, believe me. These know.  
    Who's that that bears the sceptre?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Marquis Dorset;
    And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. A bold brave gentleman. That should be
    The Duke of Suffolk?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. 'Tis the same-High Steward.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. And that my Lord of Norfolk?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Yes.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.  [Looking on the QUEEN]  Heaven
      bless thee!
    Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on.
    Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel;
    Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
    And more and richer, when he strains that lady;
    I cannot blame his conscience.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. They that bear
    The cloth of honour over her are four barons
    Of the Cinque-ports.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Those men are happy; and so are all
      are near her.  
    I take it she that carries up the train
    Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. It is; and all the rest are countesses.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Their coronets say so. These are stars indeed,
    And sometimes falling ones.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. No more of that.
                   Exit Procession, with a great flourish of trumpets

               Enter a third GENTLEMAN

    God save you, sir! Where have you been broiling?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Among the crowds i' th' Abbey, where a finger
    Could not be wedg'd in more; I am stifled
    With the mere rankness of their joy.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. You saw
    The ceremony?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. That I did.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. How was it?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Well worth the seeing.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Good sir, speak it to us.  
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. As well as I am able. The rich stream
    Of lords and ladies, having brought the Queen
    To a prepar'd place in the choir, fell of
    A distance from her, while her Grace sat down
    To rest awhile, some half an hour or so,
    In a rich chair of state, opposing freely
    The beauty of her person to the people.
    Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman
    That ever lay by man; which when the people
    Had the full view of, such a noise arose
    As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest,
    As loud, and to as many tunes; hats, cloaks-
    Doublets, I think-flew up, and had their faces
    Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
    I never saw before. Great-bellied women,
    That had not half a week to go, like rams
    In the old time of war, would shake the press,
    And make 'em reel before 'em. No man living
    Could say 'This is my wife' there, all were woven
    So strangely in one piece.  
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. But what follow'd?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. At length her Grace rose, and with
      modest paces
    Came to the altar, where she kneel'd, and saintlike
    Cast her fair eyes to heaven, and pray'd devoutly.
    Then rose again, and bow'd her to the people;
    When by the Archbishop of Canterbury
    She had all the royal makings of a queen:
    As holy oil, Edward Confessor's crown,
    The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems
    Laid nobly on her; which perform'd, the choir,
    With all the choicest music of the kingdom,
    Together sung 'Te Deum.' So she parted,
    And with the same full state pac'd back again
    To York Place, where the feast is held.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Sir,
    You must no more call it York Place: that's past:
    For since the Cardinal fell that title's lost.
    'Tis now the King's, and called Whitehall.
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. I know it;  
    But 'tis so lately alter'd that the old name
    Is fresh about me.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. What two reverend bishops
    Were those that went on each side of the Queen?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Stokesly and Gardiner: the one of Winchester,
    Newly preferr'd from the King's secretary;
    The other, London.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. He of Winchester
    Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop's,
    The virtuous Cranmer.
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. All the land knows that;
    However, yet there is no great breach. When it comes,
    Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Who may that be, I pray you?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Thomas Cromwell,
    A man in much esteem with th' King, and truly
    A worthy friend. The King has made him Master
    O' th' jewel House,
    And one, already, of the Privy Council.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. He will deserve more.  
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Yes, without all doubt.
    Come, gentlemen, ye shall go my way, which
    Is to th' court, and there ye shall be my guests:
    Something I can command. As I walk thither,
    I'll tell ye more.
  BOTH. You may command us, sir.                               Exeunt




ACT IV. SCENE 2.

Kimbolton

Enter KATHARINE, Dowager, sick; led between GRIFFITH, her Gentleman Usher,
and PATIENCE, her woman

  GRIFFITH. How does your Grace?
  KATHARINE. O Griffith, sick to death!
    My legs like loaden branches bow to th' earth,
    Willing to leave their burden. Reach a chair.
    So-now, methinks, I feel a little ease.
    Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou led'st me,
    That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey,
    Was dead?
  GRIFFITH. Yes, madam; but I think your Grace,
    Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.
  KATHARINE. Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died.
    If well, he stepp'd before me, happily,
    For my example.
  GRIFFITH. Well, the voice goes, madam;  
    For after the stout Earl Northumberland
    Arrested him at York and brought him forward,
    As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
    He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
    He could not sit his mule.
  KATHARINE. Alas, poor man!
  GRIFFITH. At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,
    Lodg'd in the abbey; where the reverend abbot,
    With all his covent, honourably receiv'd him;
    To whom he gave these words: 'O father Abbot,
    An old man, broken with the storms of state,
    Is come to lay his weary bones among ye;
    Give him a little earth for charity!'
    So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness
    Pursu'd him still And three nights after this,
    About the hour of eight-which he himself
    Foretold should be his last-full of repentance,
    Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows,
    He gave his honours to the world again,
    His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.  
  KATHARINE. So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him!
    Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
    And yet with charity. He was a man
    Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
    Himself with princes; one that, by suggestion,
    Tied all the kingdom. Simony was fair play;
    His own opinion was his law. I' th' presence
    He would say untruths, and be ever double
    Both in his words and meaning. He was never,
    But where he meant to ruin, pitiful.
    His promises were, as he then was, mighty;
    But his performance, as he is now, nothing.
    Of his own body he was ill, and gave
    The clergy ill example.
  GRIFFITH. Noble madam,
    Men's evil manners live in brass: their virtues
    We write in water. May it please your Highness
    To hear me speak his good now?
  KATHARINE. Yes, good Griffith;
    I were malicious else.  
  GRIFFITH. This Cardinal,
    Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly
    Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle.
    He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one;
    Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading;
    Lofty and sour to them that lov'd him not,
    But to those men that sought him sweet as summer.
    And though he were unsatisfied in getting-
    Which was a sin-yet in bestowing, madam,
    He was most princely: ever witness for him
    Those twins of learning that he rais'd in you,
    Ipswich and Oxford! One of which fell with him,
    Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;
    The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous,
    So excellent in art, and still so rising,
    That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue.
    His overthrow heap'd happiness upon him;
    For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
    And found the blessedness of being little.
    And, to add greater honours to his age  
    Than man could give him, he died fearing God.
  KATHARINE. After my death I wish no other herald,
    No other speaker of my living actions,
    To keep mine honour from corruption,
    But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.
    Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me,
    With thy religious truth and modesty,
    Now in his ashes honour. Peace be with him!
    patience, be near me still, and set me lower:
    I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith,
    Cause the musicians play me that sad note
    I nam'd my knell, whilst I sit meditating
    On that celestial harmony I go to.
                                              [Sad and solemn music]
  GRIFFITH. She is asleep. Good wench, let's sit down quiet,
    For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.

                 THE VISION.

      Enter, solemnly tripping one after another, six  
      PERSONAGES clad in white robes, wearing on their
      heads garlands of bays, and golden vizards on their
      faces; branches of bays or palm in their hands. They
      first congee unto her, then dance; and, at certain
      changes, the first two hold a spare garland over her
      head, at which the other four make reverent curtsies.
      Then the two that held the garland deliver the
      same to the other next two, who observe the same
      order in their changes, and holding the garland over
      her head; which done, they deliver the same garland
      to the last two, who likewise observe the same order;
      at which, as it were by inspiration, she makes
      in her sleep signs of rejoicing, and holdeth up her
      hands to heaven. And so in their dancing vanish,
      carrying the garland with them. The music continues

  KATHARINE. Spirits of peace, where are ye? Are ye all gone?
    And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye?
  GRIFFITH. Madam, we are here.
  KATHARINE. It is not you I call for.  
    Saw ye none enter since I slept?
  GRIFFITH. None, madam.
  KATHARINE. No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop
    Invite me to a banquet; whose bright faces
    Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
    They promis'd me eternal happiness,
    And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel
    I am not worthy yet to wear. I shall, assuredly.
  GRIFFITH. I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams
    Possess your fancy.
  KATHARINE. Bid the music leave,
    They are harsh and heavy to me.                    [Music ceases]
  PATIENCE. Do you note
    How much her Grace is alter'd on the sudden?
    How long her face is drawn! How pale she looks,
    And of an earthly cold! Mark her eyes.
  GRIFFITH. She is going, wench. Pray, pray.
  PATIENCE. Heaven comfort her!

             Enter a MESSENGER  

  MESSENGER. An't like your Grace-
  KATHARINE. You are a saucy fellow.
    Deserve we no more reverence?
  GRIFFITH. You are to blame,
    Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
    To use so rude behaviour. Go to, kneel.
  MESSENGER. I humbly do entreat your Highness' pardon;
    My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying
    A gentleman, sent from the King, to see you.
  KATHARINE. Admit him entrance, Griffith; but this fellow
    Let me ne'er see again.                            Exit MESSENGER

              Enter LORD CAPUCIUS

    If my sight fail not,
    You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,
    My royal nephew, and your name Capucius.
  CAPUCIUS. Madam, the same-your servant.
  KATHARINE. O, my Lord,  
    The times and titles now are alter'd strangely
    With me since first you knew me. But, I pray you,
    What is your pleasure with me?
  CAPUCIUS. Noble lady,
    First, mine own service to your Grace; the next,
    The King's request that I would visit you,
    Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
    Sends you his princely commendations
    And heartily entreats you take good comfort.
  KATHARINE. O my good lord, that comfort comes too late,
    'Tis like a pardon after execution:
    That gentle physic, given in time, had cur'd me;
    But now I am past all comforts here, but prayers.
    How does his Highness?
  CAPUCIUS. Madam, in good health.
  KATHARINE. So may he ever do! and ever flourish
    When I shall dwell with worms, and my poor name
    Banish'd the kingdom! Patience, is that letter
    I caus'd you write yet sent away?
  PATIENCE. No, madam.                       [Giving it to KATHARINE]  
  KATHARINE. Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
    This to my lord the King.
  CAPUCIUS. Most willing, madam.
  KATHARINE. In which I have commended to his goodness
    The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter-
    The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!-
    Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding-
    She is young, and of a noble modest nature;
    I hope she will deserve well-and a little
    To love her for her mother's sake, that lov'd him,
    Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor petition
    Is that his noble Grace would have some pity
    Upon my wretched women that so long
    Have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully;
    Of which there is not one, I dare avow-
    And now I should not lie-but will deserve,
    For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
    For honesty and decent carriage,
    A right good husband, let him be a noble;
    And sure those men are happy that shall have 'em.  
    The last is for my men-they are the poorest,
    But poverty could never draw 'em from me-
    That they may have their wages duly paid 'em,
    And something over to remember me by.
    If heaven had pleas'd to have given me longer life
    And able means, we had not parted thus.
    These are the whole contents; and, good my lord,
    By that you love the dearest in this world,
    As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
    Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the King
    To do me this last right.
  CAPUCIUS. By heaven, I will,
    Or let me lose the fashion of a man!
  KATHARINE. I thank you, honest lord. Remember me
    In all humility unto his Highness;
    Say his long trouble now is passing
    Out of this world. Tell him in death I bless'd him,
    For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell,
    My lord. Griffith, farewell. Nay, Patience,
    You must not leave me yet. I must to bed;  
    Call in more women. When I am dead, good wench,
    Let me be us'd with honour; strew me over
    With maiden flowers, that all the world may know
    I was a chaste wife to my grave. Embalm me,
    Then lay me forth; although unqueen'd, yet like
    A queen, and daughter to a king, inter me.
    I can no more.                          Exeunt, leading KATHARINE




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE 1.

London. A gallery in the palace

Enter GARDINER, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, a PAGE with a torch before him,
met by SIR THOMAS LOVELL

  GARDINER. It's one o'clock, boy, is't not?
  BOY. It hath struck.
  GARDINER. These should be hours for necessities,
    Not for delights; times to repair our nature
    With comforting repose, and not for us
    To waste these times. Good hour of night, Sir Thomas!
    Whither so late?
  LOVELL. Came you from the King, my lord?
  GARDINER. I did, Sir Thomas, and left him at primero
    With the Duke of Suffolk.
  LOVELL. I must to him too,
    Before he go to bed. I'll take my leave.
  GARDINER. Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What's the matter?
    It seems you are in haste. An if there be  
    No great offence belongs to't, give your friend
    Some touch of your late business. Affairs that walk-
    As they say spirits do-at midnight, have
    In them a wilder nature than the business
    That seeks despatch by day.
  LOVELL. My lord, I love you;
    And durst commend a secret to your ear
    Much weightier than this work. The Queen's in labour,
    They say in great extremity, and fear'd
    She'll with the labour end.
  GARDINER. The fruit she goes with
    I pray for heartily, that it may find
    Good time, and live; but for the stock, Sir Thomas,
    I wish it grubb'd up now.
  LOVELL. Methinks I could
    Cry thee amen; and yet my conscience says
    She's a good creature, and, sweet lady, does
    Deserve our better wishes.
  GARDINER. But, sir, sir-
    Hear me, Sir Thomas. Y'are a gentleman  
    Of mine own way; I know you wise, religious;
    And, let me tell you, it will ne'er be well-
    'Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take't of me-
    Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she,
    Sleep in their graves.
  LOVELL. Now, sir, you speak of two
    The most remark'd i' th' kingdom. As for Cromwell,
    Beside that of the Jewel House, is made Master
    O' th' Rolls, and the King's secretary; further, sir,
    Stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments,
    With which the time will load him. Th' Archbishop
    Is the King's hand and tongue, and who dare speak
    One syllable against him?
  GARDINER. Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
    There are that dare; and I myself have ventur'd
    To speak my mind of him; and indeed this day,
    Sir-I may tell it you-I think I have
    Incens'd the lords o' th' Council, that he is-
    For so I know he is, they know he is-
    A most arch heretic, a pestilence  
    That does infect the land; with which they moved
    Have broken with the King, who hath so far
    Given ear to our complaint-of his great grace
    And princely care, foreseeing those fell mischiefs
    Our reasons laid before him-hath commanded
    To-morrow morning to the Council board
    He be convented. He's a rank weed, Sir Thomas,
    And we must root him out. From your affairs
    I hinder you too long-good night, Sir Thomas.
  LOVELL. Many good nights, my lord; I rest your servant.
                                             Exeunt GARDINER and PAGE

         Enter the KING and the DUKE OF SUFFOLK

  KING. Charles, I will play no more to-night;
    My mind's not on't; you are too hard for me.
  SUFFOLK. Sir, I did never win of you before.
  KING. But little, Charles;
    Nor shall not, when my fancy's on my play.
    Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news?  
  LOVELL. I could not personally deliver to her
    What you commanded me, but by her woman
    I sent your message; who return'd her thanks
    In the great'st humbleness, and desir'd your Highness
    Most heartily to pray for her.
  KING. What say'st thou, ha?
    To pray for her? What, is she crying out?
  LOVELL. So said her woman; and that her suff'rance made
    Almost each pang a death.
  KING. Alas, good lady!
  SUFFOLK. God safely quit her of her burden, and
    With gentle travail, to the gladding of
    Your Highness with an heir!
  KING. 'Tis midnight, Charles;
    Prithee to bed; and in thy pray'rs remember
    Th' estate of my poor queen. Leave me alone,
    For I must think of that which company
    Will not be friendly to.
  SUFFOLK. I wish your Highness
    A quiet night, and my good mistress will  
    Remember in my prayers.
  KING. Charles, good night.                             Exit SUFFOLK

         Enter SIR ANTHONY DENNY

    Well, sir, what follows?
  DENNY. Sir, I have brought my lord the Archbishop,
    As you commanded me.
  KING. Ha! Canterbury?
  DENNY. Ay, my good lord.
  KING. 'Tis true. Where is he, Denny?
  DENNY. He attends your Highness' pleasure.
  KING. Bring him to us.                                   Exit DENNY
  LOVELL.  [Aside]  This is about that which the bishop spake.
    I am happily come hither.

         Re-enter DENNY, With CRANMER

  KING. Avoid the gallery.                     [LOVELL seems to stay]
    Ha! I have said. Be gone.  
    What!                                     Exeunt LOVELL and DENNY
  CRANMER.  [Aside]  I am fearful-wherefore frowns he thus?
    'Tis his aspect of terror. All's not well.
  KING. How now, my lord? You do desire to know
    Wherefore I sent for you.
  CRANMER.  [Kneeling]  It is my duty
    T'attend your Highness' pleasure.
  KING. Pray you, arise,
    My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.
    Come, you and I must walk a turn together;
    I have news to tell you; come, come, me your hand.
    Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak,
    And am right sorry to repeat what follows.
    I have, and most unwillingly, of late
    Heard many grievous-I do say, my lord,
    Grievous-complaints of you; which, being consider'd,
    Have mov'd us and our Council that you shall
    This morning come before us; where I know
    You cannot with such freedom purge yourself
    But that, till further trial in those charges  
    Which will require your answer, you must take
    Your patience to you and be well contented
    To make your house our Tow'r. You a brother of us,
    It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
    Would come against you.
  CRANMER. I humbly thank your Highness
    And am right glad to catch this good occasion
    Most throughly to be winnowed where my chaff
    And corn shall fly asunder; for I know
    There's none stands under more calumnious tongues
    Than I myself, poor man.
  KING. Stand up, good Canterbury;
    Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted
    In us, thy friend. Give me thy hand, stand up;
    Prithee let's walk. Now, by my holidame,
    What manner of man are you? My lord, I look'd
    You would have given me your petition that
    I should have ta'en some pains to bring together
    Yourself and your accusers, and to have heard you
    Without indurance further.  
  CRANMER. Most dread liege,
    The good I stand on is my truth and honesty;
    If they shall fail, I with mine enemies
    Will triumph o'er my person; which I weigh not,
    Being of those virtues vacant. I fear nothing
    What can be said against me.
  KING. Know you not
    How your state stands i' th' world, with the whole world?
    Your enemies are many, and not small; their practices
    Must bear the same proportion; and not ever
    The justice and the truth o' th' question carries
    The due o' th' verdict with it; at what ease
    Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt
    To swear against you? Such things have been done.
    You are potently oppos'd, and with a malice
    Of as great size. Ween you of better luck,
    I mean in perjur'd witness, than your Master,
    Whose minister you are, whiles here He liv'd
    Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to;
    You take a precipice for no leap of danger,  
    And woo your own destruction.
  CRANMER. God and your Majesty
    Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
    The trap is laid for me!
  KING. Be of good cheer;
    They shall no more prevail than we give way to.
    Keep comfort to you, and this morning see
    You do appear before them; if they shall chance,
    In charging you with matters, to commit you,
    The best persuasions to the contrary
    Fail not to use, and with what vehemency
    Th' occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties
    Will render you no remedy, this ring
    Deliver them, and your appeal to us
    There make before them. Look, the good man weeps!
    He's honest, on mine honour. God's blest Mother!
    I swear he is true-hearted, and a soul
    None better in my kingdom. Get you gone,
    And do as I have bid you.
                                                         Exit CRANMER  
    He has strangled his language in his tears.

           Enter OLD LADY

  GENTLEMAN.  [Within]  Come back; what mean you?
  OLD LADY. I'll not come back; the tidings that I bring
    Will make my boldness manners. Now, good angels
    Fly o'er thy royal head, and shade thy person
    Under their blessed wings!
  KING. Now, by thy looks
    I guess thy message. Is the Queen deliver'd?
    Say ay, and of a boy.
  OLD LADY. Ay, ay, my liege;
    And of a lovely boy. The God of Heaven
    Both now and ever bless her! 'Tis a girl,
    Promises boys hereafter. Sir, your queen
    Desires your visitation, and to be
    Acquainted with this stranger; 'tis as like you
    As cherry is to cherry.
  KING. Lovell!  

           Enter LOVELL

  LOVELL. Sir?
  KING. Give her an hundred marks. I'll to the Queen.            Exit
  OLD LADY. An hundred marks? By this light, I'll ha' more!
    An ordinary groom is for such payment.
    I will have more, or scold it out of him.
    Said I for this the girl was like to him! I'll
    Have more, or else unsay't; and now, while 'tis hot,
    I'll put it to the issue.                                  Exeunt




ACT V. SCENE 2.

Lobby before the Council Chamber

Enter CRANMER, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY

  CRANMER. I hope I am not too late; and yet the gentleman
    That was sent to me from the Council pray'd me
    To make great haste. All fast? What means this? Ho!
    Who waits there? Sure you know me?

           Enter KEEPER

  KEEPER. Yes, my lord;
    But yet I cannot help you.
  CRANMER. Why?
  KEEPER. Your Grace must wait till you be call'd for.

           Enter DOCTOR BUTTS

  CRANMER. So.
  BUTTS.  [Aside]  This is a piece of malice. I am glad  
    I came this way so happily; the King
    Shall understand it presently.                               Exit
  CRANMER.  [Aside]  'Tis Butts,
    The King's physician; as he pass'd along,
    How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me!
    Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace! For certain,
    This is of purpose laid by some that hate me-
    God turn their hearts! I never sought their malice-
    To quench mine honour; they would shame to make me
    Wait else at door, a fellow councillor,
    'Mong boys, grooms, and lackeys. But their pleasures
    Must be fulfill'd, and I attend with patience.

         Enter the KING and BUTTS at window above

  BUTTS. I'll show your Grace the strangest sight-
  KING. What's that, Butts?
  BUTTS. I think your Highness saw this many a day.
  KING. Body a me, where is it?
  BUTTS. There my lord:  
    The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury;
    Who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants,
    Pages, and footboys.
  KING. Ha, 'tis he indeed.
    Is this the honour they do one another?
    'Tis well there's one above 'em yet. I had thought
    They had parted so much honesty among 'em-
    At least good manners-as not thus to suffer
    A man of his place, and so near our favour,
    To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures,
    And at the door too, like a post with packets.
    By holy Mary, Butts, there's knavery!
    Let 'em alone, and draw the curtain close;
    We shall hear more anon.                                   Exeunt




ACT V. SCENE 3.

The Council Chamber

A Council table brought in, with chairs and stools, and placed
under the state. Enter LORD CHANCELLOR, places himself at the upper end
of the table on the left band, a seat being left void above him,
as for Canterbury's seat. DUKE OF SUFFOLK, DUKE OF NORFOLK, SURREY,
LORD CHAMBERLAIN, GARDINER, seat themselves in order on each side;
CROMWELL at lower end, as secretary. KEEPER at the door

  CHANCELLOR. Speak to the business, master secretary;
    Why are we met in council?
  CROMWELL. Please your honours,
    The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.
  GARDINER. Has he had knowledge of it?
  CROMWELL. Yes.
  NORFOLK. Who waits there?
  KEEPER. Without, my noble lords?
  GARDINER. Yes.  
  KEEPER. My Lord Archbishop;
    And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.
  CHANCELLOR. Let him come in.
  KEEPER. Your Grace may enter now.

      CRANMER approaches the Council table

  CHANCELLOR. My good Lord Archbishop, I am very sorry
    To sit here at this present, and behold
    That chair stand empty; but we all are men,
    In our own natures frail and capable
    Of our flesh; few are angels; out of which frailty
    And want of wisdom, you, that best should teach us,
    Have misdemean'd yourself, and not a little,
    Toward the King first, then his laws, in filling
    The whole realm by your teaching and your chaplains-
    For so we are inform'd-with new opinions,
    Divers and dangerous; which are heresies,
    And, not reform'd, may prove pernicious.
  GARDINER. Which reformation must be sudden too,  
    My noble lords; for those that tame wild horses
    Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle,
    But stop their mouth with stubborn bits and spur 'em
    Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,
    Out of our easiness and childish pity
    To one man's honour, this contagious sickness,
    Farewell all physic; and what follows then?
    Commotions, uproars, with a general taint
    Of the whole state; as of late days our neighbours,
    The upper Germany, can dearly witness,
    Yet freshly pitied in our memories.
  CRANMER. My good lords, hitherto in all the progress
    Both of my life and office, I have labour'd,
    And with no little study, that my teaching
    And the strong course of my authority
    Might go one way, and safely; and the end
    Was ever to do well. Nor is there living-
    I speak it with a single heart, my lords-
    A man that more detests, more stirs against,
    Both in his private conscience and his place,  
    Defacers of a public peace than I do.
    Pray heaven the King may never find a heart
    With less allegiance in it! Men that make
    Envy and crooked malice nourishment
    Dare bite the best. I do beseech your lordships
    That, in this case of justice, my accusers,
    Be what they will, may stand forth face to face
    And freely urge against me.
  SUFFOLK. Nay, my lord,
    That cannot be; you are a councillor,
    And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.
  GARDINER. My lord, because we have business of more moment,
    We will be short with you. 'Tis his Highness' pleasure
    And our consent, for better trial of you,
    From hence you be committed to the Tower;
    Where, being but a private man again,
    You shall know many dare accuse you boldly,
    More than, I fear, you are provided for.
  CRANMER. Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank you;
    You are always my good friend; if your will pass,  
    I shall both find your lordship judge and juror,
    You are so merciful. I see your end-
    'Tis my undoing. Love and meekness, lord,
    Become a churchman better than ambition;
    Win straying souls with modesty again,
    Cast none away. That I shall clear myself,
    Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
    I make as little doubt as you do conscience
    In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
    But reverence to your calling makes me modest.
  GARDINER. My lord, my lord, you are a sectary;
    That's the plain truth. Your painted gloss discovers,
    To men that understand you, words and weakness.
  CROMWELL. My Lord of Winchester, y'are a little,
    By your good favour, too sharp; men so noble,
    However faulty, yet should find respect
    For what they have been; 'tis a cruelty
    To load a falling man.
  GARDINER. Good Master Secretary,
    I cry your honour mercy; you may, worst  
    Of all this table, say so.
  CROMWELL. Why, my lord?
  GARDINER. Do not I know you for a favourer
    Of this new sect? Ye are not sound.
  CROMWELL. Not sound?
  GARDINER. Not sound, I say.
  CROMWELL. Would you were half so honest!
    Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.
  GARDINER. I shall remember this bold language.
  CROMWELL. Do.
    Remember your bold life too.
  CHANCELLOR. This is too much;
    Forbear, for shame, my lords.
  GARDINER. I have done.
  CROMWELL. And I.
  CHANCELLOR. Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed,
    I take it, by all voices, that forthwith
    You be convey'd to th' Tower a prisoner;
    There to remain till the King's further pleasure
    Be known unto us. Are you all agreed, lords?  
  ALL. We are.
  CRANMER. Is there no other way of mercy,
    But I must needs to th' Tower, my lords?
  GARDINER. What other
    Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome.
    Let some o' th' guard be ready there.

           Enter the guard

  CRANMER. For me?
    Must I go like a traitor thither?
  GARDINER. Receive him,
    And see him safe i' th' Tower.
  CRANMER. Stay, good my lords,
    I have a little yet to say. Look there, my lords;
    By virtue of that ring I take my cause
    Out of the gripes of cruel men and give it
    To a most noble judge, the King my master.
  CHAMBERLAIN. This is the King's ring.
  SURREY. 'Tis no counterfeit.  
  SUFFOLK. 'Tis the right ring, by heav'n. I told ye all,
    When we first put this dangerous stone a-rolling,
    'Twould fall upon ourselves.
  NORFOLK. Do you think, my lords,
    The King will suffer but the little finger
    Of this man to be vex'd?
  CHAMBERLAIN. 'Tis now too certain;
    How much more is his life in value with him!
    Would I were fairly out on't!
  CROMWELL. My mind gave me,
    In seeking tales and informations
    Against this man-whose honesty the devil
    And his disciples only envy at-
    Ye blew the fire that burns ye. Now have at ye!

      Enter the KING frowning on them; he takes his seat

  GARDINER. Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven
    In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince;
    Not only good and wise but most religious;  
    One that in all obedience makes the church
    The chief aim of his honour and, to strengthen
    That holy duty, out of dear respect,
    His royal self in judgment comes to hear
    The cause betwixt her and this great offender.
  KING. You were ever good at sudden commendations,
    Bishop of Winchester. But know I come not
    To hear such flattery now, and in my presence
    They are too thin and bare to hide offences.
    To me you cannot reach you play the spaniel,
    And think with wagging of your tongue to win me;
    But whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for, I'm sure
    Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.
    [To CRANMER]  Good man, sit down. Now let me see the proudest
    He that dares most but wag his finger at thee.
    By all that's holy, he had better starve
    Than but once think this place becomes thee not.
  SURREY. May it please your Grace-
  KING. No, sir, it does not please me.
    I had thought I had had men of some understanding  
    And wisdom of my Council; but I find none.
    Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,
    This good man-few of you deserve that title-
    This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy
    At chamber door? and one as great as you are?
    Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission
    Bid ye so far forget yourselves? I gave ye
    Power as he was a councillor to try him,
    Not as a groom. There's some of ye, I see,
    More out of malice than integrity,
    Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean;
    Which ye shall never have while I live.
  CHANCELLOR. Thus far,
    My most dread sovereign, may it like your Grace
    To let my tongue excuse all. What was purpos'd
    concerning his imprisonment was rather-
    If there be faith in men-meant for his trial
    And fair purgation to the world, than malice,
    I'm sure, in me.
  KING. Well, well, my lords, respect him;  
    Take him, and use him well, he's worthy of it.
    I will say thus much for him: if a prince
    May be beholding to a subject,
    Am for his love and service so to him.
    Make me no more ado, but all embrace him;
    Be friends, for shame, my lords! My Lord of Canterbury,
    I have a suit which you must not deny me:
    That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism;
    You must be godfather, and answer for her.
  CRANMER. The greatest monarch now alive may glory
    In such an honour; how may I deserve it,
    That am a poor and humble subject to you?
  KING. Come, come, my lord, you'd spare your spoons. You
      shall have
    Two noble partners with you: the old Duchess of Norfolk
    And Lady Marquis Dorset. Will these please you?
    Once more, my Lord of Winchester, I charge you,
    Embrace and love this man.
  GARDINER. With a true heart
    And brother-love I do it.  
  CRANMER. And let heaven
    Witness how dear I hold this confirmation.
  KING. Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart.
    The common voice, I see, is verified
    Of thee, which says thus: 'Do my Lord of Canterbury
    A shrewd turn and he's your friend for ever.'
    Come, lords, we trifle time away; I long
    To have this young one made a Christian.
    As I have made ye one, lords, one remain;
    So I grow stronger, you more honour gain.                  Exeunt




ACT V. SCENE 4.

The palace yard

Noise and tumult within. Enter PORTER and his MAN

  PORTER. You'll leave your noise anon, ye rascals. Do you
    take the court for Paris garden? Ye rude slaves, leave your
    gaping.
    [Within: Good master porter, I belong to th' larder.]
  PORTER. Belong to th' gallows, and be hang'd, ye rogue! Is
    this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree staves,
    and strong ones; these are but switches to 'em. I'll scratch
    your heads. You must be seeing christenings? Do you look
    for ale and cakes here, you rude rascals?
  MAN. Pray, sir, be patient; 'tis as much impossible,
    Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons,
    To scatter 'em as 'tis to make 'em sleep
    On May-day morning; which will never be.
    We may as well push against Paul's as stir 'em.
  PORTER. How got they in, and be hang'd?
  MAN. Alas, I know not: how gets the tide in?  
    As much as one sound cudgel of four foot-
    You see the poor remainder-could distribute,
    I made no spare, sir.
  PORTER. You did nothing, sir.
  MAN. I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colbrand,
    To mow 'em down before me; but if I spar'd any
    That had a head to hit, either young or old,
    He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker,
    Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again;
    And that I would not for a cow, God save her!
    [ Within: Do you hear, master porter?]
  PORTER. I shall be with you presently, good master puppy.
    Keep the door close, sirrah.
  MAN. What would you have me do?
  PORTER. What should you do, but knock 'em down by th'
    dozens? Is this Moorfields to muster in? Or have we some
    strange Indian with the great tool come to court, the
    women so besiege us? Bless me, what a fry of fornication
    is at door! On my Christian conscience, this one christening
    will beget a thousand: here will be father, godfather,  
    and all together.
  MAN. The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There is a fellow
    somewhat near the door, he should be a brazier by his
    face, for, o' my conscience, twenty of the dog-days now
    reign in's nose; all that stand about him are under the line,
    they need no other penance. That fire-drake did I hit three
    times on the head, and three times was his nose discharged
    against me; he stands there like a mortar-piece, to blow us.
    There was a haberdasher's wife of small wit near him, that
    rail'd upon me till her pink'd porringer fell off her head,
    for kindling such a combustion in the state. I miss'd the
    meteor once, and hit that woman, who cried out 'Clubs!'
    when I might see from far some forty truncheoners draw
    to her succour, which were the hope o' th' Strand, where
    she was quartered. They fell on; I made good my place.
    At length they came to th' broomstaff to me; I defied 'em
    still; when suddenly a file of boys behind 'em, loose shot,
    deliver'd such a show'r of pebbles that I was fain to draw
    mine honour in and let 'em win the work: the devil was
    amongst 'em, I think surely.  
  PORTER. These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse
    and fight for bitten apples; that no audience but the tribulation
    of Tower-hill or the limbs of Limehouse, their dear
    brothers, are able to endure. I have some of 'em in Limbo
    Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days;
    besides the running banquet of two beadles that is to come.

          Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN

  CHAMBERLAIN. Mercy o' me, what a multitude are here!
    They grow still too; from all parts they are coming,
    As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,
    These lazy knaves? Y'have made a fine hand, fellows.
    There's a trim rabble let in: are all these
    Your faithful friends o' th' suburbs? We shall have
    Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,
    When they pass back from the christening.
  PORTER. An't please your honour,
    We are but men; and what so many may do,
    Not being torn a pieces, we have done.  
    An army cannot rule 'em.
  CHAMBERLAIN. As I live,
    If the King blame me for't, I'll lay ye an
    By th' heels, and suddenly; and on your heads
    Clap round fines for neglect. Y'are lazy knaves;
    And here ye lie baiting of bombards, when
    Ye should do service. Hark! the trumpets sound;
    Th' are come already from the christening.
    Go break among the press and find a way out
    To let the troops pass fairly, or I'll find
    A Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months.
  PORTER. Make way there for the Princess.
  MAN. You great fellow,
    Stand close up, or I'll make your head ache.
  PORTER. You i' th' camlet, get up o' th' rail;
    I'll peck you o'er the pales else.                         Exeunt




ACT V. SCENE 5.

The palace

Enter TRUMPETS, sounding; then two ALDERMEN, LORD MAYOR, GARTER, CRANMER,
DUKE OF NORFOLK, with his marshal's staff, DUKE OF SUFFOLK,
two Noblemen bearing great standing-bowls for the christening gifts;
then four Noblemen bearing a canopy, under which the DUCHESS OF NORFOLK,
godmother, bearing the CHILD richly habited in a mantle, etc.,
train borne by a LADY; then follows the MARCHIONESS DORSET,
the other godmother, and LADIES. The troop pass once about the stage,
and GARTER speaks

  GARTER. Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send prosperous
    life, long and ever-happy, to the high and mighty
    Princess of England, Elizabeth!

           Flourish. Enter KING and guard
  
  CRANMER.  [Kneeling]  And to your royal Grace and the
      good Queen!
    My noble partners and myself thus pray:
    All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady,
    Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy,
    May hourly fall upon ye!
  KING. Thank you, good Lord Archbishop.
    What is her name?
  CRANMER. Elizabeth.
  KING. Stand up, lord.                   [The KING kisses the child]
    With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee!
    Into whose hand I give thy life.
  CRANMER. Amen.
  KING. My noble gossips, y'have been too prodigal;
    I thank ye heartily. So shall this lady,
    When she has so much English.
  CRANMER. Let me speak, sir,
    For heaven now bids me; and the words I utter
    Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth.
    This royal infant-heaven still move about her!-  
    Though in her cradle, yet now promises
    Upon this land a thousand blessings,
    Which time shall bring to ripeness. She shall be-
    But few now living can behold that goodness-
    A pattern to all princes living with her,
    And all that shall succeed. Saba was never
    More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue
    Than this pure soul shall be. All princely graces
    That mould up such a mighty piece as this is,
    With all the virtues that attend the good,
    Shall still be doubled on her. Truth shall nurse her,
    Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her;
    She shall be lov'd and fear'd. Her own shall bless her:
    Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn,
    And hang their heads with sorrow. Good grows with her;
    In her days every man shall eat in safety
    Under his own vine what he plants, and sing
    The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours.
    God shall be truly known; and those about her
    From her shall read the perfect ways of honour,  
    And by those claim their greatness, not by blood.
    Nor shall this peace sleep with her; but as when
    The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix
    Her ashes new create another heir
    As great in admiration as herself,
    So shall she leave her blessedness to one-
    When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness-
    Who from the sacred ashes of her honour
    Shall star-like rise, as great in fame as she was,
    And so stand fix'd. Peace, plenty, love, truth, terror,
    That were the servants to this chosen infant,
    Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him;
    Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,
    His honour and the greatness of his name
    Shall be, and make new nations; he shall flourish,
    And like a mountain cedar reach his branches
    To all the plains about him; our children's children
    Shall see this and bless heaven.
  KING. Thou speakest wonders.
  CRANMER. She shall be, to the happiness of England,  
    An aged princess; many days shall see her,
    And yet no day without a deed to crown it.
    Would I had known no more! But she must die-
    She must, the saints must have her-yet a virgin;
    A most unspotted lily shall she pass
    To th' ground, and all the world shall mourn her.
  KING. O Lord Archbishop,
    Thou hast made me now a man; never before
    This happy child did I get anything.
    This oracle of comfort has so pleas'd me
    That when I am in heaven I shall desire
    To see what this child does, and praise my Maker.
    I thank ye all. To you, my good Lord Mayor,
    And you, good brethren, I am much beholding;
    I have receiv'd much honour by your presence,
    And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords;
    Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye,
    She will be sick else. This day, no man think
    Has business at his house; for all shall stay.
    This little one shall make it holiday.                     Exeunt

KING_HENRY_VIII|EPILOGUE
              THE EPILOGUE.

    'Tis ten to one this play can never please
    All that are here. Some come to take their ease
    And sleep an act or two; but those, we fear,
    W'have frighted with our trumpets; so, 'tis clear,
    They'll say 'tis nought; others to hear the city
    Abus'd extremely, and to cry 'That's witty!'
    Which we have not done neither; that, I fear,
    All the expected good w'are like to hear
    For this play at this time is only in
    The merciful construction of good women;
    For such a one we show'd 'em. If they smile
    And say 'twill do, I know within a while
    All the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap
    If they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap.

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1597

KING JOHN

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

    KING JOHN
    PRINCE HENRY, his son
    ARTHUR, DUKE OF BRITAINE, son of Geffrey, late Duke of
      Britaine, the elder brother of King John
    EARL OF PEMBROKE
    EARL OF ESSEX
    EARL OF SALISBURY
    LORD BIGOT
    HUBERT DE BURGH
    ROBERT FAULCONBRIDGE, son to Sir Robert Faulconbridge
    PHILIP THE BASTARD, his half-brother
    JAMES GURNEY, servant to Lady Faulconbridge
    PETER OF POMFRET, a prophet

    KING PHILIP OF FRANCE
    LEWIS, the Dauphin
    LYMOGES, Duke of Austria
    CARDINAL PANDULPH, the Pope's legate
    MELUN, a French lord
    CHATILLON, ambassador from France to King John  

    QUEEN ELINOR, widow of King Henry II and mother to
      King John
    CONSTANCE, Mother to Arthur
    BLANCH OF SPAIN, daughter to the King of Castile
      and niece to King John
    LADY FAULCONBRIDGE, widow of Sir Robert Faulconbridge

    Lords, Citizens of Angiers, Sheriff, Heralds, Officers,
      Soldiers, Executioners, Messengers, Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
England and France



ACT I. SCENE 1

KING JOHN's palace

Enter KING JOHN, QUEEN ELINOR, PEMBROKE, ESSEX, SALISBURY, and others,
with CHATILLON

  KING JOHN. Now, say, Chatillon, what would France with us?
  CHATILLON. Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France
    In my behaviour to the majesty,
    The borrowed majesty, of England here.
  ELINOR. A strange beginning- 'borrowed majesty'!
  KING JOHN. Silence, good mother; hear the embassy.
  CHATILLON. Philip of France, in right and true behalf
    Of thy deceased brother Geffrey's son,
    Arthur Plantagenet, lays most lawful claim
    To this fair island and the territories,
    To Ireland, Poictiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
    Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
    Which sways usurpingly these several titles,
    And put the same into young Arthur's hand,
    Thy nephew and right royal sovereign.  
  KING JOHN. What follows if we disallow of this?
  CHATILLON. The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
    To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.
  KING JOHN. Here have we war for war, and blood for blood,
    Controlment for controlment- so answer France.
  CHATILLON. Then take my king's defiance from my mouth-
    The farthest limit of my embassy.
  KING JOHN. Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace;
    Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France;
    For ere thou canst report I will be there,
    The thunder of my cannon shall be heard.
    So hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath
    And sullen presage of your own decay.
    An honourable conduct let him have-
    Pembroke, look to 't. Farewell, Chatillon.
                                        Exeunt CHATILLON and PEMBROKE
  ELINOR. What now, my son! Have I not ever said
    How that ambitious Constance would not cease
    Till she had kindled France and all the world
    Upon the right and party of her son?  
    This might have been prevented and made whole
    With very easy arguments of love,
    Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
    With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.
  KING JOHN. Our strong possession and our right for us!
  ELINOR. Your strong possession much more than your right,
    Or else it must go wrong with you and me;
    So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
    Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear.

                  Enter a SHERIFF

  ESSEX. My liege, here is the strangest controversy
    Come from the country to be judg'd by you
    That e'er I heard. Shall I produce the men?
  KING JOHN. Let them approach.                          Exit SHERIFF
    Our abbeys and our priories shall pay
    This expedition's charge.

     Enter ROBERT FAULCONBRIDGE and PHILIP, his bastard  
                     brother

    What men are you?
  BASTARD. Your faithful subject I, a gentleman
    Born in Northamptonshire, and eldest son,
    As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge-
    A soldier by the honour-giving hand
    Of Coeur-de-lion knighted in the field.
  KING JOHN. What art thou?
  ROBERT. The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.
  KING JOHN. Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
    You came not of one mother then, it seems.
  BASTARD. Most certain of one mother, mighty king-
    That is well known- and, as I think, one father;
    But for the certain knowledge of that truth
    I put you o'er to heaven and to my mother.
    Of that I doubt, as all men's children may.
  ELINOR. Out on thee, rude man! Thou dost shame thy mother,
    And wound her honour with this diffidence.
  BASTARD. I, madam? No, I have no reason for it-  
    That is my brother's plea, and none of mine;
    The which if he can prove, 'a pops me out
    At least from fair five hundred pound a year.
    Heaven guard my mother's honour and my land!
  KING JOHN. A good blunt fellow. Why, being younger born,
    Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance?
  BASTARD. I know not why, except to get the land.
    But once he slander'd me with bastardy;
    But whe'er I be as true begot or no,
    That still I lay upon my mother's head;
    But that I am as well begot, my liege-
    Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!-
    Compare our faces and be judge yourself.
    If old Sir Robert did beget us both
    And were our father, and this son like him-
    O old Sir Robert, father, on my knee
    I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee!
  KING JOHN. Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent us here!
  ELINOR. He hath a trick of Coeur-de-lion's face;
    The accent of his tongue affecteth him.  
    Do you not read some tokens of my son
    In the large composition of this man?
  KING JOHN. Mine eye hath well examined his parts
    And finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak,
    What doth move you to claim your brother's land?
  BASTARD. Because he hath a half-face, like my father.
    With half that face would he have all my land:
    A half-fac'd groat five hundred pound a year!
  ROBERT. My gracious liege, when that my father liv'd,
    Your brother did employ my father much-
  BASTARD. Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land:
    Your tale must be how he employ'd my mother.
  ROBERT. And once dispatch'd him in an embassy
    To Germany, there with the Emperor
    To treat of high affairs touching that time.
    Th' advantage of his absence took the King,
    And in the meantime sojourn'd at my father's;
    Where how he did prevail I shame to speak-
    But truth is truth: large lengths of seas and shores
    Between my father and my mother lay,  
    As I have heard my father speak himself,
    When this same lusty gentleman was got.
    Upon his death-bed he by will bequeath'd
    His lands to me, and took it on his death
    That this my mother's son was none of his;
    And if he were, he came into the world
    Full fourteen weeks before the course of time.
    Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine,
    My father's land, as was my father's will.
  KING JOHN. Sirrah, your brother is legitimate:
    Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him,
    And if she did play false, the fault was hers;
    Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
    That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother,
    Who, as you say, took pains to get this son,
    Had of your father claim'd this son for his?
    In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept
    This calf, bred from his cow, from all the world;
    In sooth, he might; then, if he were my brother's,
    My brother might not claim him; nor your father,  
    Being none of his, refuse him. This concludes:
    My mother's son did get your father's heir;
    Your father's heir must have your father's land.
  ROBERT. Shall then my father's will be of no force
    To dispossess that child which is not his?
  BASTARD. Of no more force to dispossess me, sir,
    Than was his will to get me, as I think.
  ELINOR. Whether hadst thou rather be a Faulconbridge,
    And like thy brother, to enjoy thy land,
    Or the reputed son of Coeur-de-lion,
    Lord of thy presence and no land beside?
  BASTARD. Madam, an if my brother had my shape
    And I had his, Sir Robert's his, like him;
    And if my legs were two such riding-rods,
    My arms such eel-skins stuff'd, my face so thin
    That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose
    Lest men should say 'Look where three-farthings goes!'
    And, to his shape, were heir to all this land-
    Would I might never stir from off this place,
    I would give it every foot to have this face!  
    I would not be Sir Nob in any case.
  ELINOR. I like thee well. Wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
    Bequeath thy land to him and follow me?
    I am a soldier and now bound to France.
  BASTARD. Brother, take you my land, I'll take my chance.
    Your face hath got five hundred pound a year,
    Yet sell your face for fivepence and 'tis dear.
    Madam, I'll follow you unto the death.
  ELINOR. Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
  BASTARD. Our country manners give our betters way.
  KING JOHN. What is thy name?
  BASTARD. Philip, my liege, so is my name begun:
    Philip, good old Sir Robert's wife's eldest son.
  KING JOHN. From henceforth bear his name whose form thou bearest:
    Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great-
    Arise Sir Richard and Plantagenet.
  BASTARD. Brother by th' mother's side, give me your hand;
    My father gave me honour, yours gave land.
    Now blessed be the hour, by night or day,
    When I was got, Sir Robert was away!  
  ELINOR. The very spirit of Plantagenet!
    I am thy grandam, Richard: call me so.
  BASTARD. Madam, by chance, but not by truth; what though?
    Something about, a little from the right,
    In at the window, or else o'er the hatch;
    Who dares not stir by day must walk by night;
    And have is have, however men do catch.
    Near or far off, well won is still well shot;
    And I am I, howe'er I was begot.
  KING JOHN. Go, Faulconbridge; now hast thou thy desire:
    A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.
    Come, madam, and come, Richard, we must speed
    For France, for France, for it is more than need.
  BASTARD. Brother, adieu. Good fortune come to thee!
    For thou wast got i' th' way of honesty.
                                           Exeunt all but the BASTARD
    A foot of honour better than I was;
    But many a many foot of land the worse.
    Well, now can I make any Joan a lady.
    'Good den, Sir Richard!'-'God-a-mercy, fellow!'  
    And if his name be George, I'll call him Peter;
    For new-made honour doth forget men's names:
    'Tis too respective and too sociable
    For your conversion. Now your traveller,
    He and his toothpick at my worship's mess-
    And when my knightly stomach is suffic'd,
    Why then I suck my teeth and catechize
    My picked man of countries: 'My dear sir,'
    Thus leaning on mine elbow I begin
    'I shall beseech you'-That is question now;
    And then comes answer like an Absey book:
    'O sir,' says answer 'at your best command,
    At your employment, at your service, sir!'
    'No, sir,' says question 'I, sweet sir, at yours.'
    And so, ere answer knows what question would,
    Saving in dialogue of compliment,
    And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
    The Pyrenean and the river Po-
    It draws toward supper in conclusion so.
    But this is worshipful society,  
    And fits the mounting spirit like myself;
    For he is but a bastard to the time
    That doth not smack of observation-
    And so am I, whether I smack or no;
    And not alone in habit and device,
    Exterior form, outward accoutrement,
    But from the inward motion to deliver
    Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth;
    Which, though I will not practise to deceive,
    Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn;
    For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising.
    But who comes in such haste in riding-robes?
    What woman-post is this? Hath she no husband
    That will take pains to blow a horn before her?

      Enter LADY FAULCONBRIDGE, and JAMES GURNEY

    O me, 'tis my mother! How now, good lady!
    What brings you here to court so hastily?
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE. Where is that slave, thy brother?  
      Where is he
    That holds in chase mine honour up and down?
  BASTARD. My brother Robert, old Sir Robert's son?
    Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?
    Is it Sir Robert's son that you seek so?
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE. Sir Robert's son! Ay, thou unreverend boy,
    Sir Robert's son! Why scorn'st thou at Sir Robert?
    He is Sir Robert's son, and so art thou.
  BASTARD. James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile?
  GURNEY. Good leave, good Philip.
  BASTARD. Philip-Sparrow! James,
    There's toys abroad-anon I'll tell thee more.
                                                          Exit GURNEY
    Madam, I was not old Sir Robert's son;
    Sir Robert might have eat his part in me
    Upon Good Friday, and ne'er broke his fast.
    Sir Robert could do: well-marry, to confess-
    Could he get me? Sir Robert could not do it:
    We know his handiwork. Therefore, good mother,
    To whom am I beholding for these limbs?  
    Sir Robert never holp to make this leg.
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE. Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,
    That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour?
    What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?
  BASTARD. Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.
    What! I am dubb'd; I have it on my shoulder.
    But, mother, I am not Sir Robert's son:
    I have disclaim'd Sir Robert and my land;
    Legitimation, name, and all is gone.
    Then, good my mother, let me know my father-
    Some proper man, I hope. Who was it, mother?
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE. Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge?
  BASTARD. As faithfully as I deny the devil.
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE. King Richard Coeur-de-lion was thy father.
    By long and vehement suit I was seduc'd
    To make room for him in my husband's bed.
    Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge!
    Thou art the issue of my dear offence,
    Which was so strongly urg'd past my defence.
  BASTARD. Now, by this light, were I to get again,  
    Madam, I would not wish a better father.
    Some sins do bear their privilege on earth,
    And so doth yours: your fault was not your folly;
    Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
    Subjected tribute to commanding love,
    Against whose fury and unmatched force
    The aweless lion could not wage the fight
    Nor keep his princely heart from Richard's hand.
    He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
    May easily win a woman's. Ay, my mother,
    With all my heart I thank thee for my father!
    Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well
    When I was got, I'll send his soul to hell.
    Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin;
    And they shall say when Richard me begot,
    If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin.
    Who says it was, he lies; I say 'twas not.                 Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE 1

France. Before Angiers

Enter, on one side, AUSTRIA and forces; on the other, KING PHILIP OF FRANCE,
LEWIS the Dauphin, CONSTANCE, ARTHUR, and forces

  KING PHILIP. Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.
    Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,
    Richard, that robb'd the lion of his heart
    And fought the holy wars in Palestine,
    By this brave duke came early to his grave;
    And for amends to his posterity,
    At our importance hither is he come
    To spread his colours, boy, in thy behalf;
    And to rebuke the usurpation
    Of thy unnatural uncle, English John.
    Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.
  ARTHUR. God shall forgive you Coeur-de-lion's death
    The rather that you give his offspring life,
    Shadowing their right under your wings of war.
    I give you welcome with a powerless hand,  
    But with a heart full of unstained love;
    Welcome before the gates of Angiers, Duke.
  KING PHILIP. A noble boy! Who would not do thee right?
  AUSTRIA. Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss
    As seal to this indenture of my love:
    That to my home I will no more return
    Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France,
    Together with that pale, that white-fac'd shore,
    Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides
    And coops from other lands her islanders-
    Even till that England, hedg'd in with the main,
    That water-walled bulwark, still secure
    And confident from foreign purposes-
    Even till that utmost corner of the west
    Salute thee for her king. Till then, fair boy,
    Will I not think of home, but follow arms.
  CONSTANCE. O, take his mother's thanks, a widow's thanks,
    Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength
    To make a more requital to your love!
  AUSTRIA. The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords  
    In such a just and charitable war.
  KING PHILIP. Well then, to work! Our cannon shall be bent
    Against the brows of this resisting town;
    Call for our chiefest men of discipline,
    To cull the plots of best advantages.
    We'll lay before this town our royal bones,
    Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen's blood,
    But we will make it subject to this boy.
  CONSTANCE. Stay for an answer to your embassy,
    Lest unadvis'd you stain your swords with blood;
    My Lord Chatillon may from England bring
    That right in peace which here we urge in war,
    And then we shall repent each drop of blood
    That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.

                  Enter CHATILLON

  KING PHILIP. A wonder, lady! Lo, upon thy wish,
    Our messenger Chatillon is arriv'd.
    What England says, say briefly, gentle lord;  
    We coldly pause for thee. Chatillon, speak.
  CHATILLON. Then turn your forces from this paltry siege
    And stir them up against a mightier task.
    England, impatient of your just demands,
    Hath put himself in arms. The adverse winds,
    Whose leisure I have stay'd, have given him time
    To land his legions all as soon as I;
    His marches are expedient to this town,
    His forces strong, his soldiers confident.
    With him along is come the mother-queen,
    An Ate, stirring him to blood and strife;
    With her the Lady Blanch of Spain;
    With them a bastard of the king's deceas'd;
    And all th' unsettled humours of the land-
    Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,
    With ladies' faces and fierce dragons' spleens-
    Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
    Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
    To make a hazard of new fortunes here.
    In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits  
    Than now the English bottoms have waft o'er
    Did never float upon the swelling tide
    To do offence and scathe in Christendom.             [Drum beats]
    The interruption of their churlish drums
    Cuts off more circumstance: they are at hand;
    To parley or to fight, therefore prepare.
  KING PHILIP. How much unlook'd for is this expedition!
  AUSTRIA. By how much unexpected, by so much
    We must awake endeavour for defence,
    For courage mounteth with occasion.
    Let them be welcome then; we are prepar'd.

       Enter KING JOHN, ELINOR, BLANCH, the BASTARD,
                 PEMBROKE, and others

  KING JOHN. Peace be to France, if France in peace permit
    Our just and lineal entrance to our own!
    If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,
    Whiles we, God's wrathful agent, do correct
    Their proud contempt that beats His peace to heaven!  
  KING PHILIP. Peace be to England, if that war return
    From France to England, there to live in peace!
    England we love, and for that England's sake
    With burden of our armour here we sweat.
    This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
    But thou from loving England art so far
    That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king,
    Cut off the sequence of posterity,
    Outfaced infant state, and done a rape
    Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
    Look here upon thy brother Geffrey's face:
    These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his;
    This little abstract doth contain that large
    Which died in Geffrey, and the hand of time
    Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.
    That Geffrey was thy elder brother born,
    And this his son; England was Geffrey's right,
    And this is Geffrey's. In the name of God,
    How comes it then that thou art call'd a king,
    When living blood doth in these temples beat  
    Which owe the crown that thou o'er-masterest?
  KING JOHN. From whom hast thou this great commission, France,
    To draw my answer from thy articles?
  KING PHILIP. From that supernal judge that stirs good thoughts
    In any breast of strong authority
    To look into the blots and stains of right.
    That judge hath made me guardian to this boy,
    Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong,
    And by whose help I mean to chastise it.
  KING JOHN. Alack, thou dost usurp authority.
  KING PHILIP. Excuse it is to beat usurping down.
  ELINOR. Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?
  CONSTANCE. Let me make answer: thy usurping son.
  ELINOR. Out, insolent! Thy bastard shall be king,
    That thou mayst be a queen and check the world!
  CONSTANCE. My bed was ever to thy son as true
    As thine was to thy husband; and this boy
    Liker in feature to his father Geffrey
    Than thou and John in manners-being as Eke
    As rain to water, or devil to his dam.  
    My boy a bastard! By my soul, I think
    His father never was so true begot;
    It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.
  ELINOR. There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
  CONSTANCE. There's a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.
  AUSTRIA. Peace!
  BASTARD. Hear the crier.
  AUSTRIA. What the devil art thou?
  BASTARD. One that will play the devil, sir, with you,
    An 'a may catch your hide and you alone.
    You are the hare of whom the proverb goes,
    Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard;
    I'll smoke your skin-coat an I catch you right;
    Sirrah, look to 't; i' faith I will, i' faith.
  BLANCH. O, well did he become that lion's robe
    That did disrobe the lion of that robe!
  BASTARD. It lies as sightly on the back of him
    As great Alcides' shows upon an ass;
    But, ass, I'll take that burden from your back,
    Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.  
  AUSTRIA. What cracker is this same that deafs our ears
    With this abundance of superfluous breath?
    King Philip, determine what we shall do straight.
  KING PHILIP. Women and fools, break off your conference.
    King John, this is the very sum of all:
    England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
    In right of Arthur, do I claim of thee;
    Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?
  KING JOHN. My life as soon. I do defy thee, France.
    Arthur of Britaine, yield thee to my hand,
    And out of my dear love I'll give thee more
    Than e'er the coward hand of France can win.
    Submit thee, boy.
  ELINOR. Come to thy grandam, child.
  CONSTANCE. Do, child, go to it grandam, child;
    Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
    Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig.
    There's a good grandam!
  ARTHUR. Good my mother, peace!
    I would that I were low laid in my grave:  
    I am not worth this coil that's made for me.
  ELINOR. His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.
  CONSTANCE. Now shame upon you, whe'er she does or no!
    His grandam's wrongs, and not his mother's shames,
    Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes,
    Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee;
    Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be brib'd
    To do him justice and revenge on you.
  ELINOR. Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!
  CONSTANCE. Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth,
    Call not me slanderer! Thou and thine usurp
    The dominations, royalties, and rights,
    Of this oppressed boy; this is thy eldest son's son,
    Infortunate in nothing but in thee.
    Thy sins are visited in this poor child;
    The canon of the law is laid on him,
    Being but the second generation
    Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.
  KING JOHN. Bedlam, have done.
  CONSTANCE. I have but this to say-  
    That he is not only plagued for her sin,
    But God hath made her sin and her the plague
    On this removed issue, plagued for her
    And with her plague; her sin his injury,
    Her injury the beadle to her sin;
    All punish'd in the person of this child,
    And all for her-a plague upon her!
  ELINOR. Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
    A will that bars the title of thy son.
  CONSTANCE. Ay, who doubts that? A will, a wicked will;
    A woman's will; a cank'red grandam's will!
  KING PHILIP. Peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate.
    It ill beseems this presence to cry aim
    To these ill-tuned repetitions.
    Some trumpet summon hither to the walls
    These men of Angiers; let us hear them speak
    Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.

      Trumpet sounds. Enter citizens upon the walls
  
  CITIZEN. Who is it that hath warn'd us to the walls?
  KING PHILIP. 'Tis France, for England.
  KING JOHN. England for itself.
    You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects-
  KING PHILIP. You loving men of Angiers, Arthur's subjects,
    Our trumpet call'd you to this gentle parle-
  KING JOHN. For our advantage; therefore hear us first.
    These flags of France, that are advanced here
    Before the eye and prospect of your town,
    Have hither march'd to your endamagement;
    The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,
    And ready mounted are they to spit forth
    Their iron indignation 'gainst your walls;
    All preparation for a bloody siege
    And merciless proceeding by these French
    Confront your city's eyes, your winking gates;
    And but for our approach those sleeping stones
    That as a waist doth girdle you about
    By the compulsion of their ordinance
    By this time from their fixed beds of lime  
    Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made
    For bloody power to rush upon your peace.
    But on the sight of us your lawful king,
    Who painfully with much expedient march
    Have brought a countercheck before your gates,
    To save unscratch'd your city's threat'ned cheeks-
    Behold, the French amaz'd vouchsafe a parle;
    And now, instead of bullets wrapp'd in fire,
    To make a shaking fever in your walls,
    They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke,
    To make a faithless error in your cars;
    Which trust accordingly, kind citizens,
    And let us in-your King, whose labour'd spirits,
    Forwearied in this action of swift speed,
    Craves harbourage within your city walls.
  KING PHILIP. When I have said, make answer to us both.
    Lo, in this right hand, whose protection
    Is most divinely vow'd upon the right
    Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet,
    Son to the elder brother of this man,  
    And king o'er him and all that he enjoys;
    For this down-trodden equity we tread
    In warlike march these greens before your town,
    Being no further enemy to you
    Than the constraint of hospitable zeal
    In the relief of this oppressed child
    Religiously provokes. Be pleased then
    To pay that duty which you truly owe
    To him that owes it, namely, this young prince;
    And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear,
    Save in aspect, hath all offence seal'd up;
    Our cannons' malice vainly shall be spent
    Against th' invulnerable clouds of heaven;
    And with a blessed and unvex'd retire,
    With unhack'd swords and helmets all unbruis'd,
    We will bear home that lusty blood again
    Which here we came to spout against your town,
    And leave your children, wives, and you, in peace.
    But if you fondly pass our proffer'd offer,
    'Tis not the roundure of your old-fac'd walls  
    Can hide you from our messengers of war,
    Though all these English and their discipline
    Were harbour'd in their rude circumference.
    Then tell us, shall your city call us lord
    In that behalf which we have challeng'd it;
    Or shall we give the signal to our rage,
    And stalk in blood to our possession?
  CITIZEN. In brief: we are the King of England's subjects;
    For him, and in his right, we hold this town.
  KING JOHN. Acknowledge then the King, and let me in.
  CITIZEN. That can we not; but he that proves the King,
    To him will we prove loyal. Till that time
    Have we ramm'd up our gates against the world.
  KING JOHN. Doth not the crown of England prove the King?
    And if not that, I bring you witnesses:
    Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed-
  BASTARD. Bastards and else.
  KING JOHN. To verify our title with their lives.
  KING PHILIP. As many and as well-born bloods as those-
  BASTARD. Some bastards too.  
  KING PHILIP. Stand in his face to contradict his claim.
  CITIZEN. Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
    We for the worthiest hold the right from both.
  KING JOHN. Then God forgive the sin of all those souls
    That to their everlasting residence,
    Before the dew of evening fall shall fleet
    In dreadful trial of our kingdom's king!
  KING PHILIP. Amen, Amen! Mount, chevaliers; to arms!
  BASTARD. Saint George, that swing'd the dragon, and e'er since
    Sits on's horse back at mine hostess' door,
    Teach us some fence!  [To AUSTRIA]  Sirrah, were I at home,
    At your den, sirrah, with your lioness,
    I would set an ox-head to your lion's hide,
    And make a monster of you.
  AUSTRIA. Peace! no more.
  BASTARD. O, tremble, for you hear the lion roar!
  KING JOHN. Up higher to the plain, where we'll set forth
    In best appointment all our regiments.
  BASTARD. Speed then to take advantage of the field.
  KING PHILIP. It shall be so; and at the other hill  
    Command the rest to stand. God and our right!              Exeunt

    Here, after excursions, enter the HERALD OF FRANCE,
              with trumpets, to the gates

  FRENCH HERALD. You men of Angiers, open wide your gates
    And let young Arthur, Duke of Britaine, in,
    Who by the hand of France this day hath made
    Much work for tears in many an English mother,
    Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground;
    Many a widow's husband grovelling lies,
    Coldly embracing the discoloured earth;
    And victory with little loss doth play
    Upon the dancing banners of the French,
    Who are at hand, triumphantly displayed,
    To enter conquerors, and to proclaim
    Arthur of Britaine England's King and yours.

         Enter ENGLISH HERALD, with trumpet
  
  ENGLISH HERALD. Rejoice, you men of Angiers, ring your bells:
    King John, your king and England's, doth approach,
    Commander of this hot malicious day.
    Their armours that march'd hence so silver-bright
    Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen's blood.
    There stuck no plume in any English crest
    That is removed by a staff of France;
    Our colours do return in those same hands
    That did display them when we first march'd forth;
    And like a jolly troop of huntsmen come
    Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,
    Dy'd in the dying slaughter of their foes.
    Open your gates and give the victors way.
  CITIZEN. Heralds, from off our tow'rs we might behold
    From first to last the onset and retire
    Of both your armies, whose equality
    By our best eyes cannot be censured.
    Blood hath bought blood, and blows have answer'd blows;
    Strength match'd with strength, and power confronted power;
    Both are alike, and both alike we like.  
    One must prove greatest. While they weigh so even,
    We hold our town for neither, yet for both.

    Enter the two KINGS, with their powers, at several doors

  KING JOHN. France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away?
    Say, shall the current of our right run on?
    Whose passage, vex'd with thy impediment,
    Shall leave his native channel and o'erswell
    With course disturb'd even thy confining shores,
    Unless thou let his silver water keep
    A peaceful progress to the ocean.
  KING PHILIP. England, thou hast not sav'd one drop of blood
    In this hot trial more than we of France;
    Rather, lost more. And by this hand I swear,
    That sways the earth this climate overlooks,
    Before we will lay down our just-borne arms,
    We'll put thee down, 'gainst whom these arms we bear,
    Or add a royal number to the dead,
    Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss  
    With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.
  BASTARD. Ha, majesty! how high thy glory tow'rs
    When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!
    O, now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel;
    The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs;
    And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men,
    In undetermin'd differences of kings.
    Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus?
    Cry 'havoc!' kings; back to the stained field,
    You equal potents, fiery kindled spirits!
    Then let confusion of one part confirm
    The other's peace. Till then, blows, blood, and death!
  KING JOHN. Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?
  KING PHILIP. Speak, citizens, for England; who's your king?
  CITIZEN. The King of England, when we know the King.
  KING PHILIP. Know him in us that here hold up his right.
  KING JOHN. In us that are our own great deputy
    And bear possession of our person here,
    Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.
  CITIZEN. A greater pow'r than we denies all this;  
    And till it be undoubted, we do lock
    Our former scruple in our strong-barr'd gates;
    King'd of our fears, until our fears, resolv'd,
    Be by some certain king purg'd and depos'd.
  BASTARD. By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,
    And stand securely on their battlements
    As in a theatre, whence they gape and point
    At your industrious scenes and acts of death.
    Your royal presences be rul'd by me:
    Do like the mutines of Jerusalem,
    Be friends awhile, and both conjointly bend
    Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town.
    By east and west let France and England mount
    Their battering cannon, charged to the mouths,
    Till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down
    The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city.
    I'd play incessantly upon these jades,
    Even till unfenced desolation
    Leave them as naked as the vulgar air.
    That done, dissever your united strengths  
    And part your mingled colours once again,
    Turn face to face and bloody point to point;
    Then in a moment Fortune shall cull forth
    Out of one side her happy minion,
    To whom in favour she shall give the day,
    And kiss him with a glorious victory.
    How like you this wild counsel, mighty states?
    Smacks it not something of the policy?
  KING JOHN. Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads,
    I like it well. France, shall we knit our pow'rs
    And lay this Angiers even with the ground;
    Then after fight who shall be king of it?
  BASTARD. An if thou hast the mettle of a king,
    Being wrong'd as we are by this peevish town,
    Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
    As we will ours, against these saucy walls;
    And when that we have dash'd them to the ground,
    Why then defy each other, and pell-mell
    Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell.
  KING PHILIP. Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?  
  KING JOHN. We from the west will send destruction
    Into this city's bosom.
  AUSTRIA. I from the north.
  KING PHILIP. Our thunder from the south
    Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.
  BASTARD.  [Aside]  O prudent discipline! From north to south,
    Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth.
    I'll stir them to it.-Come, away, away!
  CITIZEN. Hear us, great kings: vouchsafe awhile to stay,
    And I shall show you peace and fair-fac'd league;
    Win you this city without stroke or wound;
    Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds
    That here come sacrifices for the field.
    Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings.
  KING JOHN. Speak on with favour; we are bent to hear.
  CITIZEN. That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch,
    Is niece to England; look upon the years
    Of Lewis the Dauphin and that lovely maid.
    If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
    Where should he find it fairer than in Blanch?  
    If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
    Where should he find it purer than in Blanch?
    If love ambitious sought a match of birth,
    Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch?
    Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
    Is the young Dauphin every way complete-
    If not complete of, say he is not she;
    And she again wants nothing, to name want,
    If want it be not that she is not he.
    He is the half part of a blessed man,
    Left to be finished by such as she;
    And she a fair divided excellence,
    Whose fulness of perfection lies in him.
    O, two such silver currents, when they join,
    Do glorify the banks that bound them in;
    And two such shores to two such streams made one,
    Two such controlling bounds, shall you be, Kings,
    To these two princes, if you marry them.
    This union shall do more than battery can
    To our fast-closed gates; for at this match  
    With swifter spleen than powder can enforce,
    The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope
    And give you entrance; but without this match,
    The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
    Lions more confident, mountains and rocks
    More free from motion-no, not Death himself
    In mortal fury half so peremptory
    As we to keep this city.
  BASTARD. Here's a stay
    That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death
    Out of his rags! Here's a large mouth, indeed,
    That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and seas;
    Talks as familiarly of roaring lions
    As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs!
    What cannoneer begot this lusty blood?
    He speaks plain cannon-fire, and smoke and bounce;
    He gives the bastinado with his tongue;
    Our ears are cudgell'd; not a word of his
    But buffets better than a fist of France.
    Zounds! I was never so bethump'd with words  
    Since I first call'd my brother's father dad.
  ELINOR. Son, list to this conjunction, make this match;
    Give with our niece a dowry large enough;
    For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie
    Thy now unsur'd assurance to the crown
    That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe
    The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.
    I see a yielding in the looks of France;
    Mark how they whisper. Urge them while their souls
    Are capable of this ambition,
    Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
    Of soft petitions, pity, and remorse,
    Cool and congeal again to what it was.
  CITIZEN. Why answer not the double majesties
    This friendly treaty of our threat'ned town?
  KING PHILIP. Speak England first, that hath been forward first
    To speak unto this city: what say you?
  KING JOHN. If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son,
    Can in this book of beauty read 'I love,'
    Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen;  
    For Anjou, and fair Touraine, Maine, Poictiers,
    And all that we upon this side the sea-
    Except this city now by us besieg'd-
    Find liable to our crown and dignity,
    Shall gild her bridal bed, and make her rich
    In titles, honours, and promotions,
    As she in beauty, education, blood,
    Holds hand with any princess of the world.
  KING PHILIP. What say'st thou, boy? Look in the lady's face.
  LEWIS. I do, my lord, and in her eye I find
    A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,
    The shadow of myself form'd in her eye;
    Which, being but the shadow of your son,
    Becomes a sun, and makes your son a shadow.
    I do protest I never lov'd myself
    Till now infixed I beheld myself
    Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.
                                               [Whispers with BLANCH]
  BASTARD.  [Aside]  Drawn in the flattering table of her eye,
    Hang'd in the frowning wrinkle of her brow,  
    And quarter'd in her heart-he doth espy
    Himself love's traitor. This is pity now,
    That hang'd and drawn and quarter'd there should be
    In such a love so vile a lout as he.
  BLANCH. My uncle's will in this respect is mine.
    If he see aught in you that makes him like,
    That anything he sees which moves his liking
    I can with ease translate it to my will;
    Or if you will, to speak more properly,
    I will enforce it eas'ly to my love.
    Further I will not flatter you, my lord,
    That all I see in you is worthy love,
    Than this: that nothing do I see in you-
    Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge-
    That I can find should merit any hate.
  KING JOHN. What say these young ones? What say you, my niece?
  BLANCH. That she is bound in honour still to do
    What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.
  KING JOHN. Speak then, Prince Dauphin; can you love this lady?
  LEWIS. Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love;  
    For I do love her most unfeignedly.
  KING JOHN. Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine,
    Poictiers, and Anjou, these five provinces,
    With her to thee; and this addition more,
    Full thirty thousand marks of English coin.
    Philip of France, if thou be pleas'd withal,
    Command thy son and daughter to join hands.
  KING PHILIP. It likes us well; young princes, close your hands.
  AUSTRIA. And your lips too; for I am well assur'd
    That I did so when I was first assur'd.
  KING PHILIP. Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates,
    Let in that amity which you have made;
    For at Saint Mary's chapel presently
    The rites of marriage shall be solemniz'd.
    Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?
    I know she is not; for this match made up
    Her presence would have interrupted much.
    Where is she and her son? Tell me, who knows.
  LEWIS. She is sad and passionate at your Highness' tent.
  KING PHILIP. And, by my faith, this league that we have made  
    Will give her sadness very little cure.
    Brother of England, how may we content
    This widow lady? In her right we came;
    Which we, God knows, have turn'd another way,
    To our own vantage.
  KING JOHN. We will heal up all,
    For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Britaine,
    And Earl of Richmond; and this rich fair town
    We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance;
    Some speedy messenger bid her repair
    To our solemnity. I trust we shall,
    If not fill up the measure of her will,
    Yet in some measure satisfy her so
    That we shall stop her exclamation.
    Go we as well as haste will suffer us
    To this unlook'd-for, unprepared pomp.
                                           Exeunt all but the BASTARD
  BASTARD. Mad world! mad kings! mad composition!
    John, to stop Arthur's tide in the whole,
    Hath willingly departed with a part;  
    And France, whose armour conscience buckled on,
    Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
    As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear
    With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,
    That broker that still breaks the pate of faith,
    That daily break-vow, he that wins of all,
    Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,
    Who having no external thing to lose
    But the word 'maid,' cheats the poor maid of that;
    That smooth-fac'd gentleman, tickling commodity,
    Commodity, the bias of the world-
    The world, who of itself is peised well,
    Made to run even upon even ground,
    Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias,
    This sway of motion, this commodity,
    Makes it take head from all indifferency,
    From all direction, purpose, course, intent-
    And this same bias, this commodity,
    This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word,
    Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France,  
    Hath drawn him from his own determin'd aid,
    From a resolv'd and honourable war,
    To a most base and vile-concluded peace.
    And why rail I on this commodity?
    But for because he hath not woo'd me yet;
    Not that I have the power to clutch my hand
    When his fair angels would salute my palm,
    But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
    Like a poor beggar raileth on the rich.
    Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail
    And say there is no sin but to be rich;
    And being rich, my virtue then shall be
    To say there is no vice but beggary.
    Since kings break faith upon commodity,
    Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee.                   Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE 1.

France. The FRENCH KING'S camp

Enter CONSTANCE, ARTHUR, and SALISBURY

  CONSTANCE. Gone to be married! Gone to swear a peace!
    False blood to false blood join'd! Gone to be friends!
    Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those provinces?
    It is not so; thou hast misspoke, misheard;
    Be well advis'd, tell o'er thy tale again.
    It cannot be; thou dost but say 'tis so;
    I trust I may not trust thee, for thy word
    Is but the vain breath of a common man:
    Believe me I do not believe thee, man;
    I have a king's oath to the contrary.
    Thou shalt be punish'd for thus frighting me,
    For I am sick and capable of fears,
    Oppress'd with wrongs, and therefore full of fears;
    A widow, husbandless, subject to fears;
    A woman, naturally born to fears;
    And though thou now confess thou didst but jest,  
    With my vex'd spirits I cannot take a truce,
    But they will quake and tremble all this day.
    What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?
    Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?
    What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
    Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,
    Like a proud river peering o'er his bounds?
    Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
    Then speak again-not all thy former tale,
    But this one word, whether thy tale be true.
  SALISBURY. As true as I believe you think them false
    That give you cause to prove my saying true.
  CONSTANCE. O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,
    Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die;
    And let belief and life encounter so
    As doth the fury of two desperate men
    Which in the very meeting fall and die!
    Lewis marry Blanch! O boy, then where art thou?
    France friend with England; what becomes of me?
    Fellow, be gone: I cannot brook thy sight;  
    This news hath made thee a most ugly man.
  SALISBURY. What other harm have I, good lady, done
    But spoke the harm that is by others done?
  CONSTANCE. Which harm within itself so heinous is
    As it makes harmful all that speak of it.
  ARTHUR. I do beseech you, madam, be content.
  CONSTANCE. If thou that bid'st me be content wert grim,
    Ugly, and sland'rous to thy mother's womb,
    Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,
    Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,
    Patch'd with foul moles and eye-offending marks,
    I would not care, I then would be content;
    For then I should not love thee; no, nor thou
    Become thy great birth, nor deserve a crown.
    But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy,
    Nature and Fortune join'd to make thee great:
    Of Nature's gifts thou mayst with lilies boast,
    And with the half-blown rose; but Fortune, O!
    She is corrupted, chang'd, and won from thee;
    Sh' adulterates hourly with thine uncle John,  
    And with her golden hand hath pluck'd on France
    To tread down fair respect of sovereignty,
    And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.
    France is a bawd to Fortune and King John-
    That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John!
    Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn?
    Envenom him with words, or get thee gone
    And leave those woes alone which I alone
    Am bound to under-bear.
  SALISBURY. Pardon me, madam,
    I may not go without you to the kings.
  CONSTANCE. Thou mayst, thou shalt; I will not go with thee;
    I will instruct my sorrows to be proud,
    For grief is proud, and makes his owner stoop.
    To me, and to the state of my great grief,
    Let kings assemble; for my grief's so great
    That no supporter but the huge firm earth
    Can hold it up.                     [Seats herself on the ground]
    Here I and sorrows sit;
    Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it.  

       Enter KING JOHN, KING PHILIP, LEWIS, BLANCH,
       ELINOR, the BASTARD, AUSTRIA, and attendants

  KING PHILIP. 'Tis true, fair daughter, and this blessed day
    Ever in France shall be kept festival.
    To solemnize this day the glorious sun
    Stays in his course and plays the alchemist,
    Turning with splendour of his precious eye
    The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold.
    The yearly course that brings this day about
    Shall never see it but a holiday.
  CONSTANCE.  [Rising]  A wicked day, and not a holy day!
    What hath this day deserv'd? what hath it done
    That it in golden letters should be set
    Among the high tides in the calendar?
    Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,
    This day of shame, oppression, perjury;
    Or, if it must stand still, let wives with child
    Pray that their burdens may not fall this day,  
    Lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross'd;
    But on this day let seamen fear no wreck;
    No bargains break that are not this day made;
    This day, all things begun come to ill end,
    Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!
  KING PHILIP. By heaven, lady, you shall have no cause
    To curse the fair proceedings of this day.
    Have I not pawn'd to you my majesty?
  CONSTANCE. You have beguil'd me with a counterfeit
    Resembling majesty, which, being touch'd and tried,
    Proves valueless; you are forsworn, forsworn;
    You came in arms to spill mine enemies' blood,
    But now in arms you strengthen it with yours.
    The grappling vigour and rough frown of war
    Is cold in amity and painted peace,
    And our oppression hath made up this league.
    Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjur'd kings!
    A widow cries: Be husband to me, heavens!
    Let not the hours of this ungodly day
    Wear out the day in peace; but, ere sunset,  
    Set armed discord 'twixt these perjur'd kings!
    Hear me, O, hear me!
  AUSTRIA. Lady Constance, peace!
  CONSTANCE. War! war! no peace! Peace is to me a war.
    O Lymoges! O Austria! thou dost shame
    That bloody spoil. Thou slave, thou wretch, thou coward!
    Thou little valiant, great in villainy!
    Thou ever strong upon the stronger side!
    Thou Fortune's champion that dost never fight
    But when her humorous ladyship is by
    To teach thee safety! Thou art perjur'd too,
    And sooth'st up greatness. What a fool art thou,
    A ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear
    Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded slave,
    Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side,
    Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend
    Upon thy stars, thy fortune, and thy strength,
    And dost thou now fall over to my foes?
    Thou wear a lion's hide! Doff it for shame,
    And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.  
  AUSTRIA. O that a man should speak those words to me!
  BASTARD. And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
  AUSTRIA. Thou dar'st not say so, villain, for thy life.
  BASTARD. And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
  KING JOHN. We like not this: thou dost forget thyself.

                  Enter PANDULPH

  KING PHILIP. Here comes the holy legate of the Pope.
  PANDULPH. Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!
    To thee, King John, my holy errand is.
    I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal,
    And from Pope Innocent the legate here,
    Do in his name religiously demand
    Why thou against the Church, our holy mother,
    So wilfully dost spurn; and force perforce
    Keep Stephen Langton, chosen Archbishop
    Of Canterbury, from that holy see?
    This, in our foresaid holy father's name,
    Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.  
  KING JOHN. What earthly name to interrogatories
    Can task the free breath of a sacred king?
    Thou canst not, Cardinal, devise a name
    So slight, unworthy, and ridiculous,
    To charge me to an answer, as the Pope.
    Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England
    Add thus much more, that no Italian priest
    Shall tithe or toll in our dominions;
    But as we under heaven are supreme head,
    So, under Him that great supremacy,
    Where we do reign we will alone uphold,
    Without th' assistance of a mortal hand.
    So tell the Pope, all reverence set apart
    To him and his usurp'd authority.
  KING PHILIP. Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.
  KING JOHN. Though you and all the kings of Christendom
    Are led so grossly by this meddling priest,
    Dreading the curse that money may buy out,
    And by the merit of vile gold, dross, dust,
    Purchase corrupted pardon of a man,  
    Who in that sale sells pardon from himself-
    Though you and all the rest, so grossly led,
    This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish;
    Yet I alone, alone do me oppose
    Against the Pope, and count his friends my foes.
  PANDULPH. Then by the lawful power that I have
    Thou shalt stand curs'd and excommunicate;
    And blessed shall he be that doth revolt
    From his allegiance to an heretic;
    And meritorious shall that hand be call'd,
    Canonized, and worshipp'd as a saint,
    That takes away by any secret course
    Thy hateful life.
  CONSTANCE. O, lawful let it be
    That I have room with Rome to curse awhile!
    Good father Cardinal, cry thou 'amen'
    To my keen curses; for without my wrong
    There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.
  PANDULPH. There's law and warrant, lady, for my curse.
  CONSTANCE. And for mine too; when law can do no right,  
    Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong;
    Law cannot give my child his kingdom here,
    For he that holds his kingdom holds the law;
    Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong,
    How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?
  PANDULPH. Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
    Let go the hand of that arch-heretic,
    And raise the power of France upon his head,
    Unless he do submit himself to Rome.
  ELINOR. Look'st thou pale, France? Do not let go thy hand.
  CONSTANCE. Look to that, devil, lest that France repent
    And by disjoining hands hell lose a soul.
  AUSTRIA. King Philip, listen to the Cardinal.
  BASTARD. And hang a calf's-skin on his recreant limbs.
  AUSTRIA. Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs,
    Because-
  BASTARD. Your breeches best may carry them.
  KING JOHN. Philip, what say'st thou to the Cardinal?
  CONSTANCE. What should he say, but as the Cardinal?
  LEWIS. Bethink you, father; for the difference  
    Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome
    Or the light loss of England for a friend.
    Forgo the easier.
  BLANCH. That's the curse of Rome.
  CONSTANCE. O Lewis, stand fast! The devil tempts thee here
    In likeness of a new untrimmed bride.
  BLANCH. The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,
    But from her need.
  CONSTANCE. O, if thou grant my need,
    Which only lives but by the death of faith,
    That need must needs infer this principle-
    That faith would live again by death of need.
    O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up:
    Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down!
  KING JOHN. The King is mov'd, and answers not to this.
  CONSTANCE. O be remov'd from him, and answer well!
  AUSTRIA. Do so, King Philip; hang no more in doubt.
  BASTARD. Hang nothing but a calf's-skin, most sweet lout.
  KING PHILIP. I am perplex'd and know not what to say.
  PANDULPH. What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,  
    If thou stand excommunicate and curs'd?
  KING PHILIP. Good reverend father, make my person yours,
    And tell me how you would bestow yourself.
    This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
    And the conjunction of our inward souls
    Married in league, coupled and link'd together
    With all religious strength of sacred vows;
    The latest breath that gave the sound of words
    Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love,
    Between our kingdoms and our royal selves;
    And even before this truce, but new before,
    No longer than we well could wash our hands,
    To clap this royal bargain up of peace,
    Heaven knows, they were besmear'd and overstain'd
    With slaughter's pencil, where revenge did paint
    The fearful difference of incensed kings.
    And shall these hands, so lately purg'd of blood,
    So newly join'd in love, so strong in both,
    Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet?
    Play fast and loose with faith? so jest with heaven,  
    Make such unconstant children of ourselves,
    As now again to snatch our palm from palm,
    Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage-bed
    Of smiling peace to march a bloody host,
    And make a riot on the gentle brow
    Of true sincerity? O, holy sir,
    My reverend father, let it not be so!
    Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose,
    Some gentle order; and then we shall be blest
    To do your pleasure, and continue friends.
  PANDULPH. All form is formless, order orderless,
    Save what is opposite to England's love.
    Therefore, to arms! be champion of our church,
    Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse-
    A mother's curse-on her revolting son.
    France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,
    A chafed lion by the mortal paw,
    A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,
    Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.
  KING PHILIP. I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith.  
  PANDULPH. So mak'st thou faith an enemy to faith;
    And like. a civil war set'st oath to oath.
    Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow
    First made to heaven, first be to heaven perform'd,
    That is, to be the champion of our Church.
    What since thou swor'st is sworn against thyself
    And may not be performed by thyself,
    For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss
    Is not amiss when it is truly done;
    And being not done, where doing tends to ill,
    The truth is then most done not doing it;
    The better act of purposes mistook
    Is to mistake again; though indirect,
    Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
    And falsehood cures, as fire cools fire
    Within the scorched veins of one new-burn'd.
    It is religion that doth make vows kept;
    But thou hast sworn against religion
    By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st,
    And mak'st an oath the surety for thy truth  
    Against an oath; the truth thou art unsure
    To swear swears only not to be forsworn;
    Else what a mockery should it be to swear!
    But thou dost swear only to be forsworn;
    And most forsworn to keep what thou dost swear.
    Therefore thy later vows against thy first
    Is in thyself rebellion to thyself;
    And better conquest never canst thou make
    Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts
    Against these giddy loose suggestions;
    Upon which better part our pray'rs come in,
    If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
    The peril of our curses fight on thee
    So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,
    But in despair die under the black weight.
  AUSTRIA. Rebellion, flat rebellion!
  BASTARD. Will't not be?
    Will not a calf's-skin stop that mouth of thine?
  LEWIS. Father, to arms!
  BLANCH. Upon thy wedding-day?  
    Against the blood that thou hast married?
    What, shall our feast be kept with slaughtered men?
    Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums,
    Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp?
    O husband, hear me! ay, alack, how new
    Is 'husband' in my mouth! even for that name,
    Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce,
    Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms
    Against mine uncle.
  CONSTANCE. O, upon my knee,
    Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,
    Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom
    Forethought by heaven!
  BLANCH. Now shall I see thy love. What motive may
    Be stronger with thee than the name of wife?
  CONSTANCE. That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,
    His honour. O, thine honour, Lewis, thine honour!
  LEWIS. I muse your Majesty doth seem so cold,
    When such profound respects do pull you on.
  PANDULPH. I will denounce a curse upon his head.  
  KING PHILIP. Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from thee.
  CONSTANCE. O fair return of banish'd majesty!
  ELINOR. O foul revolt of French inconstancy!
  KING JOHN. France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.
  BASTARD. Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time,
    Is it as he will? Well then, France shall rue.
  BLANCH. The sun's o'ercast with blood. Fair day, adieu!
    Which is the side that I must go withal?
    I am with both: each army hath a hand;
    And in their rage, I having hold of both,
    They whirl asunder and dismember me.
    Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win;
    Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose;
    Father, I may not wish the fortune thine;
    Grandam, I will not wish thy wishes thrive.
    Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose:
    Assured loss before the match be play'd.
  LEWIS. Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.
  BLANCH. There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.
  KING JOHN. Cousin, go draw our puissance together.  
                                                         Exit BASTARD
    France, I am burn'd up with inflaming wrath,
    A rage whose heat hath this condition
    That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,
    The blood, and dearest-valu'd blood, of France.
  KING PHILIP. Thy rage shall burn thee up, and thou shalt turn
    To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire.
    Look to thyself, thou art in jeopardy.
  KING JOHN. No more than he that threats. To arms let's hie!
                                                     Exeunt severally




SCENE 2.

France. Plains near Angiers

Alarums, excursions. Enter the BASTARD with AUSTRIA'S head

  BASTARD. Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot;
    Some airy devil hovers in the sky
    And pours down mischief. Austria's head lie there,
    While Philip breathes.

          Enter KING JOHN, ARTHUR, and HUBERT

  KING JOHN. Hubert, keep this boy. Philip, make up:
    My mother is assailed in our tent,
    And ta'en, I fear.
  BASTARD. My lord, I rescued her;
    Her Highness is in safety, fear you not;
    But on, my liege, for very little pains
    Will bring this labour to an happy end.                    Exeunt




SCENE 3.

France. Plains near Angiers

Alarums, excursions, retreat. Enter KING JOHN, ELINOR, ARTHUR,
the BASTARD, HUBERT, and LORDS

  KING JOHN.  [To ELINOR]  So shall it be; your Grace shall stay
      behind,
    So strongly guarded.  [To ARTHUR]  Cousin, look not sad;
    Thy grandam loves thee, and thy uncle will
    As dear be to thee as thy father was.
  ARTHUR. O, this will make my mother die with grief!
  KING JOHN.  [To the BASTARD]  Cousin, away for England! haste
      before,
    And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags
    Of hoarding abbots; imprisoned angels
    Set at liberty; the fat ribs of peace
    Must by the hungry now be fed upon.
    Use our commission in his utmost force.
  BASTARD. Bell, book, and candle, shall not drive me back,
    When gold and silver becks me to come on.  
    I leave your Highness. Grandam, I will pray,
    If ever I remember to be holy,
    For your fair safety. So, I kiss your hand.
  ELINOR. Farewell, gentle cousin.
  KING JOHN. Coz, farewell.
                                                         Exit BASTARD
  ELINOR. Come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.
  KING JOHN. Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,
    We owe thee much! Within this wall of flesh
    There is a soul counts thee her creditor,
    And with advantage means to pay thy love;
    And, my good friend, thy voluntary oath
    Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.
    Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say-
    But I will fit it with some better time.
    By heaven, Hubert, I am almost asham'd
    To say what good respect I have of thee.
  HUBERT. I am much bounden to your Majesty.
  KING JOHN. Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,
    But thou shalt have; and creep time ne'er so slow,  
    Yet it shall come for me to do thee good.
    I had a thing to say-but let it go:
    The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
    Attended with the pleasures of the world,
    Is all too wanton and too full of gawds
    To give me audience. If the midnight bell
    Did with his iron tongue and brazen mouth
    Sound on into the drowsy race of night;
    If this same were a churchyard where we stand,
    And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs;
    Or if that surly spirit, melancholy,
    Had bak'd thy blood and made it heavy-thick,
    Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
    Making that idiot, laughter, keep men's eyes
    And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,
    A passion hateful to my purposes;
    Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes,
    Hear me without thine cars, and make reply
    Without a tongue, using conceit alone,
    Without eyes, ears, and harmful sound of words-  
    Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,
    I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts.
    But, ah, I will not! Yet I love thee well;
    And, by my troth, I think thou lov'st me well.
  HUBERT. So well that what you bid me undertake,
    Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
    By heaven, I would do it.
  KING JOHN. Do not I know thou wouldst?
    Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye
    On yon young boy. I'll tell thee what, my friend,
    He is a very serpent in my way;
    And wheresoe'er this foot of mine doth tread,
    He lies before me. Dost thou understand me?
    Thou art his keeper.
  HUBERT. And I'll keep him so
    That he shall not offend your Majesty.
  KING JOHN. Death.
  HUBERT. My lord?
  KING JOHN. A grave.
  HUBERT. He shall not live.  
  KING JOHN. Enough!
    I could be merry now. Hubert, I love thee.
    Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee.
    Remember. Madam, fare you well;
    I'll send those powers o'er to your Majesty.
  ELINOR. My blessing go with thee!
  KING JOHN.  [To ARTHUR]  For England, cousin, go;
    Hubert shall be your man, attend on you
    With all true duty. On toward Calais, ho!                  Exeunt




SCENE 4.

France. The FRENCH KING's camp

Enter KING PHILIP, LEWIS, PANDULPH, and attendants

  KING PHILIP. So by a roaring tempest on the flood
    A whole armado of convicted sail
    Is scattered and disjoin'd from fellowship.
  PANDULPH. Courage and comfort! All shall yet go well.
  KING PHILIP. What can go well, when we have run so ill.
    Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?
    Arthur ta'en prisoner? Divers dear friends slain?
    And bloody England into England gone,
    O'erbearing interruption, spite of France?
  LEWIS. he hath won, that hath he fortified;
    So hot a speed with such advice dispos'd,
    Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,
    Doth want example; who hath read or heard
    Of any kindred action like to this?
  KING PHILIP. Well could I bear that England had this praise,
    So we could find some pattern of our shame.  

                   Enter CONSTANCE

    Look who comes here! a grave unto a soul;
    Holding th' eternal spirit, against her will,
    In the vile prison of afflicted breath.
    I prithee, lady, go away with me.
  CONSTANCE. Lo now! now see the issue of your peace!
  KING PHILIP. Patience, good lady! Comfort, gentle Constance!
  CONSTANCE. No, I defy all counsel, all redress,
    But that which ends all counsel, true redress-
    Death, death; O amiable lovely death!
    Thou odoriferous stench! sound rottenness!
    Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
    Thou hate and terror to prosperity,
    And I will kiss thy detestable bones,
    And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows,
    And ring these fingers with thy household worms,
    And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust,
    And be a carrion monster like thyself.  
    Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smil'st,
    And buss thee as thy wife. Misery's love,
    O, come to me!
  KING PHILIP. O fair affliction, peace!
  CONSTANCE. No, no, I will not, having breath to cry.
    O that my tongue were in the thunder's mouth!
    Then with a passion would I shake the world,
    And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy
    Which cannot hear a lady's feeble voice,
    Which scorns a modern invocation.
  PANDULPH. Lady, you utter madness and not sorrow.
  CONSTANCE. Thou art not holy to belie me so.
    I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine;
    My name is Constance; I was Geffrey's wife;
    Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost.
    I am not mad-I would to heaven I were!
    For then 'tis like I should forget myself.
    O, if I could, what grief should I forget!
    Preach some philosophy to make me mad,
    And thou shalt be canoniz'd, Cardinal;  
    For, being not mad, but sensible of grief,
    My reasonable part produces reason
    How I may be deliver'd of these woes,
    And teaches me to kill or hang myself.
    If I were mad I should forget my son,
    Or madly think a babe of clouts were he.
    I am not mad; too well, too well I feel
    The different plague of each calamity.
  KING PHILIP. Bind up those tresses. O, what love I note
    In the fair multitude of those her hairs!
    Where but by a chance a silver drop hath fall'n,
    Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends
    Do glue themselves in sociable grief,
    Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,
    Sticking together in calamity.
  CONSTANCE. To England, if you will.
  KING PHILIP. Bind up your hairs.
  CONSTANCE. Yes, that I will; and wherefore will I do it?
    I tore them from their bonds, and cried aloud
    'O that these hands could so redeem my son,  
    As they have given these hairs their liberty!'
    But now I envy at their liberty,
    And will again commit them to their bonds,
    Because my poor child is a prisoner.
    And, father Cardinal, I have heard you say
    That we shall see and know our friends in heaven;
    If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
    For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
    To him that did but yesterday suspire,
    There was not such a gracious creature born.
    But now will canker sorrow eat my bud
    And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
    And he will look as hollow as a ghost,
    As dim and meagre as an ague's fit;
    And so he'll die; and, rising so again,
    When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
    I shall not know him. Therefore never, never
    Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.
  PANDULPH. You hold too heinous a respect of grief.
  CONSTANCE. He talks to me that never had a son.  
  KING PHILIP. You are as fond of grief as of your child.
  CONSTANCE. Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
    Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
    Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
    Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
    Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;
    Then have I reason to be fond of grief.
    Fare you well; had you such a loss as I,
    I could give better comfort than you do.
    I will not keep this form upon my head,
                                                   [Tearing her hair]
    When there is such disorder in my wit.
    O Lord! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son!
    My life, my joy, my food, my ail the world!
    My widow-comfort, and my sorrows' cure!                      Exit
  KING PHILIP. I fear some outrage, and I'll follow her.         Exit
  LEWIS. There's nothing in this world can make me joy.
    Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale
    Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
    And bitter shame hath spoil'd the sweet world's taste,  
    That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.
  PANDULPH. Before the curing of a strong disease,
    Even in the instant of repair and health,
    The fit is strongest; evils that take leave
    On their departure most of all show evil;
    What have you lost by losing of this day?
  LEWIS. All days of glory, joy, and happiness.
  PANDULPH. If you had won it, certainly you had.
    No, no; when Fortune means to men most good,
    She looks upon them with a threat'ning eye.
    'Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost
    In this which he accounts so clearly won.
    Are not you griev'd that Arthur is his prisoner?
  LEWIS. As heartily as he is glad he hath him.
  PANDULPH. Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.
    Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit;
    For even the breath of what I mean to speak
    Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,
    Out of the path which shall directly lead
    Thy foot to England's throne. And therefore mark:  
    John hath seiz'd Arthur; and it cannot be
    That, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins,
    The misplac'd John should entertain an hour,
    One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.
    A sceptre snatch'd with an unruly hand
    Must be boisterously maintain'd as gain'd,
    And he that stands upon a slipp'ry place
    Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up;
    That John may stand then, Arthur needs must fall;
    So be it, for it cannot be but so.
  LEWIS. But what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall?
  PANDULPH. You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife,
    May then make all the claim that Arthur did.
  LEWIS. And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did.
  PANDULPH. How green you are and fresh in this old world!
    John lays you plots; the times conspire with you;
    For he that steeps his safety in true blood
    Shall find but bloody safety and untrue.
    This act, so evilly borne, shall cool the hearts
    Of all his people and freeze up their zeal,  
    That none so small advantage shall step forth
    To check his reign but they will cherish it;
    No natural exhalation in the sky,
    No scope of nature, no distemper'd day,
    No common wind, no customed event,
    But they will pluck away his natural cause
    And call them meteors, prodigies, and signs,
    Abortives, presages, and tongues of heaven,
    Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.
  LEWIS. May be he will not touch young Arthur's life,
    But hold himself safe in his prisonment.
  PANDULPH. O, Sir, when he shall hear of your approach,
    If that young Arthur be not gone already,
    Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts
    Of all his people shall revolt from him,
    And kiss the lips of unacquainted change,
    And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath
    Out of the bloody fingers' ends of john.
    Methinks I see this hurly all on foot;
    And, O, what better matter breeds for you  
    Than I have nam'd! The bastard Faulconbridge
    Is now in England ransacking the Church,
    Offending charity; if but a dozen French
    Were there in arms, they would be as a can
    To train ten thousand English to their side;
    Or as a little snow, tumbled about,
    Anon becomes a mountain. O noble Dauphin,
    Go with me to the King. 'Tis wonderful
    What may be wrought out of their discontent,
    Now that their souls are topful of offence.
    For England go; I will whet on the King.
  LEWIS. Strong reasons makes strong actions. Let us go;
    If you say ay, the King will not say no.                   Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE 1.

England. A castle

Enter HUBERT and EXECUTIONERS

  HUBERT. Heat me these irons hot; and look thou stand
    Within the arras. When I strike my foot
    Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
    And bind the boy which you shall find with me
    Fast to the chair. Be heedful; hence, and watch.
  EXECUTIONER. I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.
  HUBERT. Uncleanly scruples! Fear not you. Look to't.
                                                  Exeunt EXECUTIONERS
    Young lad, come forth; I have to say with you.

                    Enter ARTHUR

  ARTHUR. Good morrow, Hubert.
  HUBERT. Good morrow, little Prince.
  ARTHUR. As little prince, having so great a tide
    To be more prince, as may be. You are sad.  
  HUBERT. Indeed I have been merrier.
  ARTHUR. Mercy on me!
    Methinks no body should be sad but I;
    Yet, I remember, when I was in France,
    Young gentlemen would be as sad as night,
    Only for wantonness. By my christendom,
    So I were out of prison and kept sheep,
    I should be as merry as the day is long;
    And so I would be here but that I doubt
    My uncle practises more harm to me;
    He is afraid of me, and I of him.
    Is it my fault that I was Geffrey's son?
    No, indeed, ist not; and I would to heaven
    I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert.
  HUBERT.  [Aside]  If I talk to him, with his innocent prate
    He will awake my mercy, which lies dead;
    Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.
  ARTHUR. Are you sick, Hubert? You look pale to-day;
    In sooth, I would you were a little sick,
    That I might sit all night and watch with you.  
    I warrant I love you more than you do me.
  HUBERT.  [Aside]  His words do take possession of my bosom.-
    Read here, young Arthur.                        [Showing a paper]
      [Aside]  How now, foolish rheum!
    Turning dispiteous torture out of door!
    I must be brief, lest resolution drop
    Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.-
    Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?
  ARTHUR. Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect.
    Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes?
  HUBERT. Young boy, I must.
  ARTHUR. And will you?
  HUBERT. And I will.
  ARTHUR. Have you the heart? When your head did but ache,
    I knit my handkerchief about your brows-
    The best I had, a princess wrought it me-
    And I did never ask it you again;
    And with my hand at midnight held your head;
    And, like the watchful minutes to the hour,
    Still and anon cheer'd up the heavy time,  
    Saying 'What lack you?' and 'Where lies your grief?'
    Or 'What good love may I perform for you?'
    Many a poor man's son would have lyen still,
    And ne'er have spoke a loving word to you;
    But you at your sick service had a prince.
    Nay, you may think my love was crafty love,
    And call it cunning. Do, an if you will.
    If heaven be pleas'd that you must use me ill,
    Why, then you must. Will you put out mine eyes,
    These eyes that never did nor never shall
    So much as frown on you?
  HUBERT. I have sworn to do it;
    And with hot irons must I burn them out.
  ARTHUR. Ah, none but in this iron age would do it!
    The iron of itself, though heat red-hot,
    Approaching near these eyes would drink my tears,
    And quench his fiery indignation
    Even in the matter of mine innocence;
    Nay, after that, consume away in rust
    But for containing fire to harm mine eye.  
    Are you more stubborn-hard than hammer'd iron?
    An if an angel should have come to me
    And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes,
    I would not have believ'd him-no tongue but Hubert's.
  HUBERT.  [Stamps]  Come forth.

     Re-enter EXECUTIONERS, With cord, irons, etc.

    Do as I bid you do.
  ARTHUR. O, save me, Hubert, save me! My eyes are out
    Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.
  HUBERT. Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.
  ARTHUR. Alas, what need you be so boist'rous rough?
    I will not struggle, I will stand stone-still.
    For heaven sake, Hubert, let me not be bound!
    Nay, hear me, Hubert! Drive these men away,
    And I will sit as quiet as a lamb;
    I will not stir, nor wince, nor speak a word,
    Nor look upon the iron angrily;
    Thrust but these men away, and I'll forgive you,  
    Whatever torment you do put me to.
  HUBERT. Go, stand within; let me alone with him.
  EXECUTIONER. I am best pleas'd to be from such a deed.
                                                  Exeunt EXECUTIONERS
  ARTHUR. Alas, I then have chid away my friend!
    He hath a stern look but a gentle heart.
    Let him come back, that his compassion may
    Give life to yours.
  HUBERT. Come, boy, prepare yourself.
  ARTHUR. Is there no remedy?
  HUBERT. None, but to lose your eyes.
  ARTHUR. O heaven, that there were but a mote in yours,
    A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair,
    Any annoyance in that precious sense!
    Then, feeling what small things are boisterous there,
    Your vile intent must needs seem horrible.
  HUBERT. Is this your promise? Go to, hold your tongue.
  ARTHUR. Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
    Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes.
    Let me not hold my tongue, let me not, Hubert;  
    Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue,
    So I may keep mine eyes. O, spare mine eyes,
    Though to no use but still to look on you!
    Lo, by my troth, the instrument is cold
    And would not harm me.
  HUBERT. I can heat it, boy.
  ARTHUR. No, in good sooth; the fire is dead with grief,
    Being create for comfort, to be us'd
    In undeserved extremes. See else yourself:
    There is no malice in this burning coal;
    The breath of heaven hath blown his spirit out,
    And strew'd repentant ashes on his head.
  HUBERT. But with my breath I can revive it, boy.
  ARTHUR. An if you do, you will but make it blush
    And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert.
    Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes,
    And, like a dog that is compell'd to fight,
    Snatch at his master that doth tarre him on.
    All things that you should use to do me wrong
    Deny their office; only you do lack  
    That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends,
    Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.
  HUBERT. Well, see to live; I will not touch thine eye
    For all the treasure that thine uncle owes.
    Yet I am sworn, and I did purpose, boy,
    With this same very iron to burn them out.
  ARTHUR. O, now you look like Hubert! All this while
    You were disguis'd.
  HUBERT. Peace; no more. Adieu.
    Your uncle must not know but you are dead:
    I'll fill these dogged spies with false reports;
    And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure
    That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
    Will not offend thee.
  ARTHUR. O heaven! I thank you, Hubert.
  HUBERT. Silence; no more. Go closely in with me.
    Much danger do I undergo for thee.                         Exeunt




SCENE 2.

England. KING JOHN'S palace

Enter KING JOHN, PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and other LORDS

  KING JOHN. Here once again we sit, once again crown'd,
    And look'd upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.
  PEMBROKE. This once again, but that your Highness pleas'd,
    Was once superfluous: you were crown'd before,
    And that high royalty was ne'er pluck'd off,
    The faiths of men ne'er stained with revolt;
    Fresh expectation troubled not the land
    With any long'd-for change or better state.
  SALISBURY. Therefore, to be possess'd with double pomp,
    To guard a title that was rich before,
    To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
    To throw a perfume on the violet,
    To smooth the ice, or add another hue
    Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light
    To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
    Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.
  PEMBROKE. But that your royal pleasure must be done,
    This act is as an ancient tale new told  
    And, in the last repeating, troublesome,
    Being urged at a time unseasonable.
  SALISBURY. In this the antique and well-noted face
    Of plain old form is much disfigured;
    And like a shifted wind unto a sail
    It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
    Startles and frights consideration,
    Makes sound opinion sick, and truth suspected,
    For putting on so new a fashion'd robe.
  PEMBROKE. When workmen strive to do better than well,
    They do confound their skill in covetousness;
    And oftentimes excusing of a fault
    Doth make the fault the worse by th' excuse,
    As patches set upon a little breach
    Discredit more in hiding of the fault
    Than did the fault before it was so patch'd.
  SALISBURY. To this effect, before you were new-crown'd,
    We breath'd our counsel; but it pleas'd your Highness
    To overbear it; and we are all well pleas'd,
    Since all and every part of what we would  
    Doth make a stand at what your Highness will.
  KING JOHN. Some reasons of this double coronation
    I have possess'd you with, and think them strong;
    And more, more strong, when lesser is my fear,
    I shall indue you with. Meantime but ask
    What you would have reform'd that is not well,
    And well shall you perceive how willingly
    I will both hear and grant you your requests.
  PEMBROKE. Then I, as one that am the tongue of these,
    To sound the purposes of all their hearts,
    Both for myself and them- but, chief of all,
    Your safety, for the which myself and them
    Bend their best studies, heartily request
    Th' enfranchisement of Arthur, whose restraint
    Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent
    To break into this dangerous argument:
    If what in rest you have in right you hold,
    Why then your fears-which, as they say, attend
    The steps of wrong-should move you to mew up
    Your tender kinsman, and to choke his days  
    With barbarous ignorance, and deny his youth
    The rich advantage of good exercise?
    That the time's enemies may not have this
    To grace occasions, let it be our suit
    That you have bid us ask his liberty;
    Which for our goods we do no further ask
    Than whereupon our weal, on you depending,
    Counts it your weal he have his liberty.
  KING JOHN. Let it be so. I do commit his youth
    To your direction.

                     Enter HUBERT

    [Aside]  Hubert, what news with you?
  PEMBROKE. This is the man should do the bloody deed:
    He show'd his warrant to a friend of mine;
    The image of a wicked heinous fault
    Lives in his eye; that close aspect of his
    Doth show the mood of a much troubled breast,
    And I do fearfully believe 'tis done  
    What we so fear'd he had a charge to do.
  SALISBURY. The colour of the King doth come and go
    Between his purpose and his conscience,
    Like heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set.
    His passion is so ripe it needs must break.
  PEMBROKE. And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
    The foul corruption of a sweet child's death.
  KING JOHN. We cannot hold mortality's strong hand.
    Good lords, although my will to give is living,
    The suit which you demand is gone and dead:
    He tells us Arthur is deceas'd to-night.
  SALISBURY. Indeed, we fear'd his sickness was past cure.
  PEMBROKE. Indeed, we heard how near his death he was,
    Before the child himself felt he was sick.
    This must be answer'd either here or hence.
  KING JOHN. Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
    Think you I bear the shears of destiny?
    Have I commandment on the pulse of life?
  SALISBURY. It is apparent foul-play; and 'tis shame
    That greatness should so grossly offer it.  
    So thrive it in your game! and so, farewell.
  PEMBROKE. Stay yet, Lord Salisbury, I'll go with thee
    And find th' inheritance of this poor child,
    His little kingdom of a forced grave.
    That blood which ow'd the breadth of all this isle
    Three foot of it doth hold-bad world the while!
    This must not be thus borne: this will break out
    To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.            Exeunt LORDS
  KING JOHN. They burn in indignation. I repent.
    There is no sure foundation set on blood,
    No certain life achiev'd by others' death.

                 Enter a MESSENGER

    A fearful eye thou hast; where is that blood
    That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks?
    So foul a sky clears not without a storm.
    Pour down thy weather-how goes all in France?
  MESSENGER. From France to England. Never such a pow'r
    For any foreign preparation  
    Was levied in the body of a land.
    The copy of your speed is learn'd by them,
    For when you should be told they do prepare,
    The tidings comes that they are all arriv'd.
  KING JOHN. O, where hath our intelligence been drunk?
    Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care,
    That such an army could be drawn in France,
    And she not hear of it?
  MESSENGER. My liege, her ear
    Is stopp'd with dust: the first of April died
    Your noble mother; and as I hear, my lord,
    The Lady Constance in a frenzy died
    Three days before; but this from rumour's tongue
    I idly heard-if true or false I know not.
  KING JOHN. Withhold thy speed, dreadful occasion!
    O, make a league with me, till I have pleas'd
    My discontented peers! What! mother dead!
    How wildly then walks my estate in France!
    Under whose conduct came those pow'rs of France
    That thou for truth giv'st out are landed here?  
  MESSENGER. Under the Dauphin.
  KING JOHN. Thou hast made me giddy
    With these in tidings.

         Enter the BASTARD and PETER OF POMFRET

    Now! What says the world
    To your proceedings? Do not seek to stuff
    My head with more ill news, for it is fun.
  BASTARD. But if you be afear'd to hear the worst,
    Then let the worst, unheard, fall on your head.
  KING JOHN. Bear with me, cousin, for I was amaz'd
    Under the tide; but now I breathe again
    Aloft the flood, and can give audience
    To any tongue, speak it of what it will.
  BASTARD. How I have sped among the clergymen
    The sums I have collected shall express.
    But as I travell'd hither through the land,
    I find the people strangely fantasied;
    Possess'd with rumours, full of idle dreams.  
    Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear;
    And here's a prophet that I brought with me
    From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
    With many hundreds treading on his heels;
    To whom he sung, in rude harsh-sounding rhymes,
    That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon,
    Your Highness should deliver up your crown.
  KING JOHN. Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so?
  PETER. Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.
  KING JOHN. Hubert, away with him; imprison him;
    And on that day at noon whereon he says
    I shall yield up my crown let him be hang'd.
    Deliver him to safety; and return,
    For I must use thee.
                                               Exit HUBERT with PETER
    O my gentle cousin,
    Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arriv'd?
  BASTARD. The French, my lord; men's mouths are full of it;
    Besides, I met Lord Bigot and Lord Salisbury,
    With eyes as red as new-enkindled fire,  
    And others more, going to seek the grave
    Of Arthur, whom they say is kill'd to-night
    On your suggestion.
  KING JOHN. Gentle kinsman, go
    And thrust thyself into their companies.
    I have a way to will their loves again;
    Bring them before me.
  BASTARD. I Will seek them out.
  KING JOHN. Nay, but make haste; the better foot before.
    O, let me have no subject enemies
    When adverse foreigners affright my towns
    With dreadful pomp of stout invasion!
    Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
    And fly like thought from them to me again.
  BASTARD. The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.
  KING JOHN. Spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman.
                                                         Exit BASTARD
    Go after him; for he perhaps shall need
    Some messenger betwixt me and the peers;
    And be thou he.  
  MESSENGER. With all my heart, my liege.                        Exit
  KING JOHN. My mother dead!

                   Re-enter HUBERT

  HUBERT. My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night;
    Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
    The other four in wondrous motion.
  KING JOHN. Five moons!
  HUBERT. Old men and beldams in the streets
    Do prophesy upon it dangerously;
    Young Arthur's death is common in their mouths;
    And when they talk of him, they shake their heads,
    And whisper one another in the ear;
    And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist,
    Whilst he that hears makes fearful action
    With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
    I saw a smith stand with his hammer, thus,
    The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
    With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news;  
    Who, with his shears and measure in his hand,
    Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste
    Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet,
    Told of a many thousand warlike French
    That were embattailed and rank'd in Kent.
    Another lean unwash'd artificer
    Cuts off his tale, and talks of Arthur's death.
  KING JOHN. Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears?
    Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur's death?
    Thy hand hath murd'red him. I had a mighty cause
    To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him.
  HUBERT. No had, my lord! Why, did you not provoke me?
  KING JOHN. It is the curse of kings to be attended
    By slaves that take their humours for a warrant
    To break within the bloody house of life,
    And on the winking of authority
    To understand a law; to know the meaning
    Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns
    More upon humour than advis'd respect.
  HUBERT. Here is your hand and seal for what I did.  
  KING JOHN. O, when the last account 'twixt heaven and earth
    Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal
    Witness against us to damnation!
    How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
    Make deeds ill done! Hadst not thou been by,
    A fellow by the hand of nature mark'd,
    Quoted and sign'd to do a deed of shame,
    This murder had not come into my mind;
    But, taking note of thy abhorr'd aspect,
    Finding thee fit for bloody villainy,
    Apt, liable to be employ'd in danger,
    I faintly broke with thee of Arthur's death;
    And thou, to be endeared to a king,
    Made it no conscience to destroy a prince.
  HUBERT. My lord-
  KING JOHN. Hadst thou but shook thy head or made pause,
    When I spake darkly what I purposed,
    Or turn'd an eye of doubt upon my face,
    As bid me tell my tale in express words,
    Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off,  
    And those thy fears might have wrought fears in me.
    But thou didst understand me by my signs,
    And didst in signs again parley with sin;
    Yea, without stop, didst let thy heart consent,
    And consequently thy rude hand to act
    The deed which both our tongues held vile to name.
    Out of my sight, and never see me more!
    My nobles leave me; and my state is braved,
    Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign pow'rs;
    Nay, in the body of the fleshly land,
    This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath,
    Hostility and civil tumult reigns
    Between my conscience and my cousin's death.
  HUBERT. Arm you against your other enemies,
    I'll make a peace between your soul and you.
    Young Arthur is alive. This hand of mine
    Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand,
    Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.
    Within this bosom never ent'red yet
    The dreadful motion of a murderous thought  
    And you have slander'd nature in my form,
    Which, howsoever rude exteriorly,
    Is yet the cover of a fairer mind
    Than to be butcher of an innocent child.
  KING JOHN. Doth Arthur live? O, haste thee to the peers,
    Throw this report on their incensed rage
    And make them tame to their obedience!
    Forgive the comment that my passion made
    Upon thy feature; for my rage was blind,
    And foul imaginary eyes of blood
    Presented thee more hideous than thou art.
    O, answer not; but to my closet bring
    The angry lords with all expedient haste.
    I conjure thee but slowly; run more fast.                  Exeunt




SCENE 3.

England. Before the castle

Enter ARTHUR, on the walls

  ARTHUR. The wall is high, and yet will I leap down.
    Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not!
    There's few or none do know me; if they did,
    This ship-boy's semblance hath disguis'd me quite.
    I am afraid; and yet I'll venture it.
    If I get down and do not break my limbs,
    I'll find a thousand shifts to get away.
    As good to die and go, as die and stay.              [Leaps down]
    O me! my uncle's spirit is in these stones.
    Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones!
    [Dies]

          Enter PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and BIGOT

  SALISBURY. Lords, I will meet him at Saint Edmundsbury;
    It is our safety, and we must embrace  
    This gentle offer of the perilous time.
  PEMBROKE. Who brought that letter from the Cardinal?
  SALISBURY. The Count Melun, a noble lord of France,
    Whose private with me of the Dauphin's love
    Is much more general than these lines import.
  BIGOT. To-morrow morning let us meet him then.
  SALISBURY. Or rather then set forward; for 'twill be
    Two long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet.

                 Enter the BASTARD

  BASTARD. Once more to-day well met, distemper'd lords!
    The King by me requests your presence straight.
  SALISBURY. The King hath dispossess'd himself of us.
    We will not line his thin bestained cloak
    With our pure honours, nor attend the foot
    That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks.
    Return and tell him so. We know the worst.
  BASTARD. Whate'er you think, good words, I think, were best.
  SALISBURY. Our griefs, and not our manners, reason now.  
  BASTARD. But there is little reason in your grief;
    Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now.
  PEMBROKE. Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege.
  BASTARD. 'Tis true-to hurt his master, no man else.
  SALISBURY. This is the prison. What is he lies here?
  PEMBROKE. O death, made proud with pure and princely beauty!
    The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.
  SALISBURY. Murder, as hating what himself hath done,
    Doth lay it open to urge on revenge.
  BIGOT. Or, when he doom'd this beauty to a grave,
    Found it too precious-princely for a grave.
  SALISBURY. Sir Richard, what think you? Have you beheld,
    Or have you read or heard, or could you think?
    Or do you almost think, although you see,
    That you do see? Could thought, without this object,
    Form such another? This is the very top,
    The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest,
    Of murder's arms; this is the bloodiest shame,
    The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke,
    That ever wall-ey'd wrath or staring rage  
    Presented to the tears of soft remorse.
  PEMBROKE. All murders past do stand excus'd in this;
    And this, so sole and so unmatchable,
    Shall give a holiness, a purity,
    To the yet unbegotten sin of times,
    And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,
    Exampled by this heinous spectacle.
  BASTARD. It is a damned and a bloody work;
    The graceless action of a heavy hand,
    If that it be the work of any hand.
  SALISBURY. If that it be the work of any hand!
    We had a kind of light what would ensue.
    It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand;
    The practice and the purpose of the King;
    From whose obedience I forbid my soul
    Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
    And breathing to his breathless excellence
    The incense of a vow, a holy vow,
    Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
    Never to be infected with delight,  
    Nor conversant with ease and idleness,
    Till I have set a glory to this hand
    By giving it the worship of revenge.
  PEMBROKE. and BIGOT. Our souls religiously confirm thy words.

                     Enter HUBERT

  HUBERT. Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you.
    Arthur doth live; the King hath sent for you.
  SALISBURY. O, he is bold, and blushes not at death!
    Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone!
  HUBERT. I am no villain.
  SALISBURY. Must I rob the law?                  [Drawing his sword]
  BASTARD. Your sword is bright, sir; put it up again.
  SALISBURY. Not till I sheathe it in a murderer's skin.
  HUBERT. Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say;
    By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours.
    I would not have you, lord, forget yourself,
    Nor tempt the danger of my true defence;
    Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget  
    Your worth, your greatness and nobility.
  BIGOT. Out, dunghill! Dar'st thou brave a nobleman?
  HUBERT. Not for my life; but yet I dare defend
    My innocent life against an emperor.
  SALISBURY. Thou art a murderer.
  HUBERT. Do not prove me so.
    Yet I am none. Whose tongue soe'er speaks false,
    Not truly speaks; who speaks not truly, lies.
  PEMBROKE. Cut him to pieces.
  BASTARD. Keep the peace, I say.
  SALISBURY. Stand by, or I shall gall you, Faulconbridge.
  BASTARD. Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury.
    If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
    Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
    I'll strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime;
    Or I'll so maul you and your toasting-iron
    That you shall think the devil is come from hell.
  BIGOT. What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?
    Second a villain and a murderer?
  HUBERT. Lord Bigot, I am none.  
  BIGOT. Who kill'd this prince?
  HUBERT. 'Tis not an hour since I left him well.
    I honour'd him, I lov'd him, and will weep
    My date of life out for his sweet life's loss.
  SALISBURY. Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes,
    For villainy is not without such rheum;
    And he, long traded in it, makes it seem
    Like rivers of remorse and innocency.
    Away with me, all you whose souls abhor
    Th' uncleanly savours of a slaughter-house;
    For I am stifled with this smell of sin.
  BIGOT. Away toward Bury, to the Dauphin there!
  PEMBROKE. There tell the King he may inquire us out.
                                                         Exeunt LORDS
  BASTARD. Here's a good world! Knew you of this fair work?
    Beyond the infinite and boundless reach
    Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,
    Art thou damn'd, Hubert.
  HUBERT. Do but hear me, sir.
  BASTARD. Ha! I'll tell thee what:  
    Thou'rt damn'd as black-nay, nothing is so black-
    Thou art more deep damn'd than Prince Lucifer;
    There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell
    As thou shalt be, if thou didst kill this child.
  HUBERT. Upon my soul-
  BASTARD. If thou didst but consent
    To this most cruel act, do but despair;
    And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread
    That ever spider twisted from her womb
    Will serve to strangle thee; a rush will be a beam
    To hang thee on; or wouldst thou drown thyself,
    Put but a little water in a spoon
    And it shall be as all the ocean,
    Enough to stifle such a villain up
    I do suspect thee very grievously.
  HUBERT. If I in act, consent, or sin of thought,
    Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
    Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
    Let hell want pains enough to torture me!
    I left him well.  
  BASTARD. Go, bear him in thine arms.
    I am amaz'd, methinks, and lose my way
    Among the thorns and dangers of this world.
    How easy dost thou take all England up!
    From forth this morsel of dead royalty
    The life, the right, and truth of all this realm
    Is fled to heaven; and England now is left
    To tug and scamble, and to part by th' teeth
    The unowed interest of proud-swelling state.
    Now for the bare-pick'd bone of majesty
    Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest
    And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace;
    Now powers from home and discontents at home
    Meet in one line; and vast confusion waits,
    As doth a raven on a sick-fall'n beast,
    The imminent decay of wrested pomp.
    Now happy he whose cloak and cincture can
    Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child,
    And follow me with speed. I'll to the King;
    A thousand businesses are brief in hand,  
    And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.                Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE 1.
England. KING JOHN'S palace

Enter KING JOHN, PANDULPH, and attendants

  KING JOHN. Thus have I yielded up into your hand
    The circle of my glory.
  PANDULPH.  [Gives back the crown]  Take again
    From this my hand, as holding of the Pope,
    Your sovereign greatness and authority.
  KING JOHN. Now keep your holy word; go meet the French;
    And from his Holiness use all your power
    To stop their marches fore we are inflam'd.
    Our discontented counties do revolt;
    Our people quarrel with obedience,
    Swearing allegiance and the love of soul
    To stranger blood, to foreign royalty.
    This inundation of mistemp'red humour
    Rests by you only to be qualified.
    Then pause not; for the present time's so sick
    That present med'cine must be minist'red  
    Or overthrow incurable ensues.
  PANDULPH. It was my breath that blew this tempest up,
    Upon your stubborn usage of the Pope;
    But since you are a gentle convertite,
    My tongue shall hush again this storm of war
    And make fair weather in your blust'ring land.
    On this Ascension-day, remember well,
    Upon your oath of service to the Pope,
    Go I to make the French lay down their arms.                 Exit
  KING JOHN. Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet
    Say that before Ascension-day at noon
    My crown I should give off? Even so I have.
    I did suppose it should be on constraint;
    But, heaven be thank'd, it is but voluntary.

                 Enter the BASTARD

  BASTARD. All Kent hath yielded; nothing there holds out
    But Dover Castle. London hath receiv'd,
    Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers.  
    Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone
    To offer service to your enemy;
    And wild amazement hurries up and down
    The little number of your doubtful friends.
  KING JOHN. Would not my lords return to me again
    After they heard young Arthur was alive?
    BASTARD. They found him dead, and cast into the streets,
    An empty casket, where the jewel of life
    By some damn'd hand was robbed and ta'en away.
  KING JOHN. That villain Hubert told me he did live.
  BASTARD. So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew.
    But wherefore do you droop? Why look you sad?
    Be great in act, as you have been in thought;
    Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
    Govern the motion of a kingly eye.
    Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire;
    Threaten the threat'ner, and outface the brow
    Of bragging horror; so shall inferior eyes,
    That borrow their behaviours from the great,
    Grow great by your example and put on  
    The dauntless spirit of resolution.
    Away, and glister like the god of war
    When he intendeth to become the field;
    Show boldness and aspiring confidence.
    What, shall they seek the lion in his den,
    And fright him there, and make him tremble there?
    O, let it not be said! Forage, and run
    To meet displeasure farther from the doors
    And grapple with him ere he come so nigh.
  KING JOHN. The legate of the Pope hath been with me,
    And I have made a happy peace with him;
    And he hath promis'd to dismiss the powers
    Led by the Dauphin.
  BASTARD. O inglorious league!
    Shall we, upon the footing of our land,
    Send fair-play orders, and make compromise,
    Insinuation, parley, and base truce,
    To arms invasive? Shall a beardless boy,
    A cock'red silken wanton, brave our fields
    And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil,  
    Mocking the air with colours idly spread,
    And find no check? Let us, my liege, to arms.
    Perchance the Cardinal cannot make your peace;
    Or, if he do, let it at least be said
    They saw we had a purpose of defence.
  KING JOHN. Have thou the ordering of this present time.
  BASTARD. Away, then, with good courage!
    Yet, I know
    Our party may well meet a prouder foe.                     Exeunt




SCENE 2.
England. The DAUPHIN'S camp at Saint Edmundsbury

Enter, in arms, LEWIS, SALISBURY, MELUN, PEMBROKE, BIGOT, and soldiers

  LEWIS. My Lord Melun, let this be copied out
    And keep it safe for our remembrance;
    Return the precedent to these lords again,
    That, having our fair order written down,
    Both they and we, perusing o'er these notes,
    May know wherefore we took the sacrament,
    And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.
  SALISBURY. Upon our sides it never shall be broken.
    And, noble Dauphin, albeit we swear
    A voluntary zeal and an unurg'd faith
    To your proceedings; yet, believe me, Prince,
    I am not glad that such a sore of time
    Should seek a plaster by contemn'd revolt,
    And heal the inveterate canker of one wound
    By making many. O, it grieves my soul  
    That I must draw this metal from my side
    To be a widow-maker! O, and there
    Where honourable rescue and defence
    Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!
    But such is the infection of the time
    That, for the health and physic of our right,
    We cannot deal but with the very hand
    Of stern injustice and confused wrong.
    And is't not pity, O my grieved friends!
    That we, the sons and children of this isle,
    Were born to see so sad an hour as this;
    Wherein we step after a stranger-march
    Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up
    Her enemies' ranks-I must withdraw and weep
    Upon the spot of this enforced cause-
    To grace the gentry of a land remote
    And follow unacquainted colours here?
    What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove!
    That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about,
    Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself  
    And grapple thee unto a pagan shore,
    Where these two Christian armies might combine
    The blood of malice in a vein of league,
    And not to spend it so unneighbourly!
  LEWIS. A noble temper dost thou show in this;
    And great affections wrestling in thy bosom
    Doth make an earthquake of nobility.
    O, what a noble combat hast thou fought
    Between compulsion and a brave respect!
    Let me wipe off this honourable dew
    That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks.
    My heart hath melted at a lady's tears,
    Being an ordinary inundation;
    But this effusion of such manly drops,
    This show'r, blown up by tempest of the soul,
    Startles mine eyes and makes me more amaz'd
    Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven
    Figur'd quite o'er with burning meteors.
    Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury,
    And with a great heart heave away this storm;  
    Commend these waters to those baby eyes
    That never saw the giant world enrag'd,
    Nor met with fortune other than at feasts,
    Full of warm blood, of mirth, of gossiping.
    Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep
    Into the purse of rich prosperity
    As Lewis himself. So, nobles, shall you all,
    That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.

                Enter PANDULPH

    And even there, methinks, an angel spake:
    Look where the holy legate comes apace,
    To give us warrant from the hand of heaven
    And on our actions set the name of right
    With holy breath.
  PANDULPH. Hail, noble prince of France!
    The next is this: King John hath reconcil'd
    Himself to Rome; his spirit is come in,
    That so stood out against the holy Church,  
    The great metropolis and see of Rome.
    Therefore thy threat'ning colours now wind up
    And tame the savage spirit of wild war,
    That, like a lion fostered up at hand,
    It may lie gently at the foot of peace
    And be no further harmful than in show.
  LEWIS. Your Grace shall pardon me, I will not back:
    I am too high-born to be propertied,
    To be a secondary at control,
    Or useful serving-man and instrument
    To any sovereign state throughout the world.
    Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars
    Between this chastis'd kingdom and myself
    And brought in matter that should feed this fire;
    And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out
    With that same weak wind which enkindled it.
    You taught me how to know the face of right,
    Acquainted me with interest to this land,
    Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart;
    And come ye now to tell me John hath made  
    His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me?
    I, by the honour of my marriage-bed,
    After young Arthur, claim this land for mine;
    And, now it is half-conquer'd, must I back
    Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?
    Am I Rome's slave? What penny hath Rome borne,
    What men provided, what munition sent,
    To underprop this action? Is 't not I
    That undergo this charge? Who else but I,
    And such as to my claim are liable,
    Sweat in this business and maintain this war?
    Have I not heard these islanders shout out
    'Vive le roi!' as I have bank'd their towns?
    Have I not here the best cards for the game
    To will this easy match, play'd for a crown?
    And shall I now give o'er the yielded set?
    No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.
  PANDULPH. You look but on the outside of this work.
  LEWIS. Outside or inside, I will not return
    Till my attempt so much be glorified  
    As to my ample hope was promised
    Before I drew this gallant head of war,
    And cull'd these fiery spirits from the world
    To outlook conquest, and to will renown
    Even in the jaws of danger and of death.
                                                     [Trumpet sounds]
    What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?

             Enter the BASTARD, attended

  BASTARD. According to the fair play of the world,
    Let me have audience: I am sent to speak.
    My holy lord of Milan, from the King
    I come, to learn how you have dealt for him;
    And, as you answer, I do know the scope
    And warrant limited unto my tongue.
  PANDULPH. The Dauphin is too wilful-opposite,
    And will not temporize with my entreaties;
    He flatly says he'll not lay down his arms.
  BASTARD. By all the blood that ever fury breath'd,  
    The youth says well. Now hear our English King;
    For thus his royalty doth speak in me.
    He is prepar'd, and reason too he should.
    This apish and unmannerly approach,
    This harness'd masque and unadvised revel
    This unhair'd sauciness and boyish troops,
    The King doth smile at; and is well prepar'd
    To whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms,
    From out the circle of his territories.
    That hand which had the strength, even at your door.
    To cudgel you and make you take the hatch,
    To dive like buckets in concealed wells,
    To crouch in litter of your stable planks,
    To lie like pawns lock'd up in chests and trunks,
    To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out
    In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake
    Even at the crying of your nation's crow,
    Thinking this voice an armed Englishman-
    Shall that victorious hand be feebled here
    That in your chambers gave you chastisement?  
    No. Know the gallant monarch is in arms
    And like an eagle o'er his aery tow'rs
    To souse annoyance that comes near his nest.
    And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts,
    You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb
    Of your dear mother England, blush for shame;
    For your own ladies and pale-visag'd maids,
    Like Amazons, come tripping after drums,
    Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change,
    Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts
    To fierce and bloody inclination.
  LEWIS. There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace;
    We grant thou canst outscold us. Fare thee well;
    We hold our time too precious to be spent
    With such a brabbler.
  PANDULPH. Give me leave to speak.
  BASTARD. No, I will speak.
  LEWIS. We will attend to neither.
    Strike up the drums; and let the tongue of war,
    Plead for our interest and our being here.  
  BASTARD. Indeed, your drums, being beaten, will cry out;
    And so shall you, being beaten. Do but start
    And echo with the clamour of thy drum,
    And even at hand a drum is ready brac'd
    That shall reverberate all as loud as thine:
    Sound but another, and another shall,
    As loud as thine, rattle the welkin's ear
    And mock the deep-mouth'd thunder; for at hand-
    Not trusting to this halting legate here,
    Whom he hath us'd rather for sport than need-
    Is warlike John; and in his forehead sits
    A bare-ribb'd death, whose office is this day
    To feast upon whole thousands of the French.
  LEWIS. Strike up our drums to find this danger out.
  BASTARD. And thou shalt find it, Dauphin, do not doubt.
    Exeunt




SCENE 3.

England. The field of battle

Alarums. Enter KING JOHN and HUBERT

  KING JOHN. How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.
  HUBERT. Badly, I fear. How fares your Majesty?
  KING JOHN. This fever that hath troubled me so long
    Lies heavy on me. O, my heart is sick!

                  Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulconbridge,
    Desires your Majesty to leave the field
    And send him word by me which way you go.
  KING JOHN. Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.
  MESSENGER. Be of good comfort; for the great supply
    That was expected by the Dauphin here
    Are wreck'd three nights ago on Goodwin Sands;
    This news was brought to Richard but even now.
    The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.  
  KING JOHN. Ay me, this tyrant fever burns me up
    And will not let me welcome this good news.
    Set on toward Swinstead; to my litter straight;
    Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint.                    Exeunt




SCENE 4.

England. Another part of the battlefield

Enter SALISBURY, PEMBROKE, and BIGOT

  SALISBURY. I did not think the King so stor'd with friends.
  PEMBROKE. Up once again; put spirit in the French;
    If they miscarry, we miscarry too.
  SALISBURY. That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge,
    In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.
  PEMBROKE. They say King John, sore sick, hath left the field.

                 Enter MELUN, wounded

  MELUN. Lead me to the revolts of England here.
  SALISBURY. When we were happy we had other names.
  PEMBROKE. It is the Count Melun.
  SALISBURY. Wounded to death.
  MELUN. Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold;
    Unthread the rude eye of rebellion,
    And welcome home again discarded faith.  
    Seek out King John, and fall before his feet;
    For if the French be lords of this loud day,
    He means to recompense the pains you take
    By cutting off your heads. Thus hath he sworn,
    And I with him, and many moe with me,
    Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury;
    Even on that altar where we swore to you
    Dear amity and everlasting love.
  SALISBURY. May this be possible? May this be true?
  MELUN. Have I not hideous death within my view,
    Retaining but a quantity of life,
    Which bleeds away even as a form of wax
    Resolveth from his figure 'gainst the fire?
    What in the world should make me now deceive,
    Since I must lose the use of all deceit?
    Why should I then be false, since it is true
    That I must die here, and live hence by truth?
    I say again, if Lewis do will the day,
    He is forsworn if e'er those eyes of yours
    Behold another day break in the east;  
    But even this night, whose black contagious breath
    Already smokes about the burning crest
    Of the old, feeble, and day-wearied sun,
    Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire,
    Paying the fine of rated treachery
    Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives.
    If Lewis by your assistance win the day.
    Commend me to one Hubert, with your King;
    The love of him-and this respect besides,
    For that my grandsire was an Englishman-
    Awakes my conscience to confess all this.
    In lieu whereof, I pray you, bear me hence
    From forth the noise and rumour of the field,
    Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
    In peace, and part this body and my soul
    With contemplation and devout desires.
  SALISBURY. We do believe thee; and beshrew my soul
    But I do love the favour and the form
    Of this most fair occasion, by the which
    We will untread the steps of damned flight,  
    And like a bated and retired flood,
    Leaving our rankness and irregular course,
    Stoop low within those bounds we have o'erlook'd,
    And calmly run on in obedience
    Even to our ocean, to great King John.
    My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence;
    For I do see the cruel pangs of death
    Right in thine eye. Away, my friends! New flight,
    And happy newness, that intends old right.
                                            Exeunt, leading off MELUN




SCENE 5.

England. The French camp

Enter LEWIS and his train

  LEWIS. The sun of heaven, methought, was loath to set,
    But stay'd and made the western welkin blush,
    When English measure backward their own ground
    In faint retire. O, bravely came we off,
    When with a volley of our needless shot,
    After such bloody toil, we bid good night;
    And wound our tott'ring colours clearly up,
    Last in the field and almost lords of it!

                 Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. Where is my prince, the Dauphin?
  LEWIS. Here; what news?
  MESSENGER. The Count Melun is slain; the English lords
    By his persuasion are again fall'n off,
    And your supply, which you have wish'd so long,  
    Are cast away and sunk on Goodwin Sands.
  LEWIS. Ah, foul shrewd news! Beshrew thy very heart!
    I did not think to be so sad to-night
    As this hath made me. Who was he that said
    King John did fly an hour or two before
    The stumbling night did part our weary pow'rs?
  MESSENGER. Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.
  LEWIS. keep good quarter and good care to-night;
    The day shall not be up so soon as I
    To try the fair adventure of to-morrow.                    Exeunt




SCENE 6.

An open place wear Swinstead Abbey

Enter the BASTARD and HUBERT, severally

  HUBERT. Who's there? Speak, ho! speak quickly, or I shoot.
  BASTARD. A friend. What art thou?
  HUBERT. Of the part of England.
  BASTARD. Whither dost thou go?
  HUBERT. What's that to thee? Why may I not demand
    Of thine affairs as well as thou of mine?
  BASTARD. Hubert, I think.
  HUBERT. Thou hast a perfect thought.
    I will upon all hazards well believe
    Thou art my friend that know'st my tongue so well.
    Who art thou?
  BASTARD. Who thou wilt. And if thou please,
    Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think
    I come one way of the Plantagenets.
  HUBERT. Unkind remembrance! thou and eyeless night
    Have done me shame. Brave soldier, pardon me  
    That any accent breaking from thy tongue
    Should scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.
  BASTARD. Come, come; sans compliment, what news abroad?
  HUBERT. Why, here walk I in the black brow of night
    To find you out.
  BASTARD. Brief, then; and what's the news?
  HUBERT. O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,
    Black, fearful, comfortless, and horrible.
  BASTARD. Show me the very wound of this ill news;
    I am no woman, I'll not swoon at it.
  HUBERT. The King, I fear, is poison'd by a monk;
    I left him almost speechless and broke out
    To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
    The better arm you to the sudden time
    Than if you had at leisure known of this.
  BASTARD. How did he take it; who did taste to him?
  HUBERT. A monk, I tell you; a resolved villain,
    Whose bowels suddenly burst out. The King
    Yet speaks, and peradventure may recover.
  BASTARD. Who didst thou leave to tend his Majesty?  
  HUBERT. Why, know you not? The lords are all come back,
    And brought Prince Henry in their company;
    At whose request the King hath pardon'd them,
    And they are all about his Majesty.
  BASTARD. Withhold thine indignation, mighty heaven,
    And tempt us not to bear above our power!
    I'll tell thee, Hubert, half my power this night,
    Passing these flats, are taken by the tide-
    These Lincoln Washes have devoured them;
    Myself, well-mounted, hardly have escap'd.
    Away, before! conduct me to the King;
    I doubt he will be dead or ere I come.                     Exeunt




SCENE 7.

The orchard at Swinstead Abbey

Enter PRINCE HENRY, SALISBURY, and BIGOT

  PRINCE HENRY. It is too late; the life of all his blood
    Is touch'd corruptibly, and his pure brain.
    Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house,
    Doth by the idle comments that it makes
    Foretell the ending of mortality.

                   Enter PEMBROKE

  PEMBROKE. His Highness yet doth speak, and holds belief
    That, being brought into the open air,
    It would allay the burning quality
    Of that fell poison which assaileth him.
  PRINCE HENRY. Let him be brought into the orchard here.
    Doth he still rage?                                    Exit BIGOT
  PEMBROKE. He is more patient
    Than when you left him; even now he sung.  
  PRINCE HENRY. O vanity of sickness! Fierce extremes
    In their continuance will not feel themselves.
    Death, having prey'd upon the outward parts,
    Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now
    Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds
    With many legions of strange fantasies,
    Which, in their throng and press to that last hold,
    Confound themselves. 'Tis strange that death should sing.
    I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan
    Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death,
    And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings
    His soul and body to their lasting rest.
  SALISBURY. Be of good comfort, Prince; for you are born
    To set a form upon that indigest
    Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude.

       Re-enter BIGOT and attendants, who bring in
                KING JOHN in a chair

  KING JOHN. Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room;  
    It would not out at windows nor at doors.
    There is so hot a summer in my bosom
    That all my bowels crumble up to dust.
    I am a scribbled form drawn with a pen
    Upon a parchment, and against this fire
    Do I shrink up.
  PRINCE HENRY. How fares your Majesty?
  KING JOHN. Poison'd-ill-fare! Dead, forsook, cast off;
    And none of you will bid the winter come
    To thrust his icy fingers in my maw,
    Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course
    Through my burn'd bosom, nor entreat the north
    To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips
    And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much;
    I beg cold comfort; and you are so strait
    And so ingrateful you deny me that.
  PRINCE HENRY. O that there were some virtue in my tears,
    That might relieve you!
  KING JOHN. The salt in them is hot.
    Within me is a hell; and there the poison  
    Is as a fiend confin'd to tyrannize
    On unreprievable condemned blood.

                 Enter the BASTARD

  BASTARD. O, I am scalded with my violent motion
    And spleen of speed to see your Majesty!
  KING JOHN. O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye!
    The tackle of my heart is crack'd and burnt,
    And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail
    Are turned to one thread, one little hair;
    My heart hath one poor string to stay it by,
    Which holds but till thy news be uttered;
    And then all this thou seest is but a clod
    And module of confounded royalty.
  BASTARD. The Dauphin is preparing hitherward,
    Where God He knows how we shall answer him;
    For in a night the best part of my pow'r,
    As I upon advantage did remove,
    Were in the Washes all unwarily  
    Devoured by the unexpected flood.                 [The KING dies]
  SALISBURY. You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.
    My liege! my lord! But now a king-now thus.
  PRINCE HENRY. Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
    What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
    When this was now a king, and now is clay?
  BASTARD. Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind
    To do the office for thee of revenge,
    And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
    As it on earth hath been thy servant still.
    Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres,
    Where be your pow'rs? Show now your mended faiths,
    And instantly return with me again
    To push destruction and perpetual shame
    Out of the weak door of our fainting land.
    Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought;
    The Dauphin rages at our very heels.
  SALISBURY. It seems you know not, then, so much as we:
    The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,
    Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin,  
    And brings from him such offers of our peace
    As we with honour and respect may take,
    With purpose presently to leave this war.
  BASTARD. He will the rather do it when he sees
    Ourselves well sinewed to our defence.
  SALISBURY. Nay, 'tis in a manner done already;
    For many carriages he hath dispatch'd
    To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel
    To the disposing of the Cardinal;
    With whom yourself, myself, and other lords,
    If you think meet, this afternoon will post
    To consummate this business happily.
  BASTARD. Let it be so. And you, my noble Prince,
    With other princes that may best be spar'd,
    Shall wait upon your father's funeral.
  PRINCE HENRY. At Worcester must his body be interr'd;
    For so he will'd it.
  BASTARD. Thither shall it, then;
    And happily may your sweet self put on
    The lineal state and glory of the land!  
    To whom, with all submission, on my knee
    I do bequeath my faithful services
    And true subjection everlastingly.
  SALISBURY. And the like tender of our love we make,
    To rest without a spot for evermore.
  PRINCE HENRY. I have a kind soul that would give you thanks,
    And knows not how to do it but with tears.
  BASTARD. O, let us pay the time but needful woe,
    Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs.
    This England never did, nor never shall,
    Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,
    But when it first did help to wound itself.
    Now these her princes are come home again,
    Come the three corners of the world in arms,
    And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue,
    If England to itself do rest but true.                     Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>






1599


THE TRAGEDY OF JULIUS CAESAR

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  JULIUS CAESAR, Roman statesman and general
  OCTAVIUS, Triumvir after Caesar's death, later Augustus Caesar,
    first emperor of Rome
  MARK ANTONY, general and friend of Caesar, a Triumvir after his death
  LEPIDUS, third member of the Triumvirate
  MARCUS BRUTUS, leader of the conspiracy against Caesar
  CASSIUS, instigator of the conspiracy
  CASCA,          conspirator against Caesar
  TREBONIUS,           "          "     "
  CAIUS LIGARIUS,      "          "     "
  DECIUS BRUTUS,       "          "     "
  METELLUS CIMBER,     "          "     "
  CINNA,               "          "     "
  CALPURNIA, wife of Caesar
  PORTIA, wife of Brutus
  CICERO,     senator
  POPILIUS,      "
  POPILIUS LENA, "
  FLAVIUS, tribune  
  MARULLUS, tribune
  CATO,     supportor of Brutus
  LUCILIUS,     "     "    "
  TITINIUS,     "     "    "
  MESSALA,      "     "    "
  VOLUMNIUS,    "     "    "
  ARTEMIDORUS, a teacher of rhetoric
  CINNA, a poet
  VARRO,     servant to Brutus
  CLITUS,       "    "     "
  CLAUDIO,      "    "     "
  STRATO,       "    "     "
  LUCIUS,       "    "     "
  DARDANIUS,    "    "     "
  PINDARUS, servant to Cassius
  The Ghost of Caesar
  A Soothsayer
  A Poet
  Senators, Citizens, Soldiers, Commoners, Messengers, and Servants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE: Rome, the conspirators' camp near Sardis,  and the plains of Philippi.


ACT I. SCENE I.
Rome. A street.

Enter Flavius, Marullus, and certain Commoners.

  FLAVIUS. Hence, home, you idle creatures, get you home.
    Is this a holiday? What, know you not,
    Being mechanical, you ought not walk
    Upon a laboring day without the sign
    Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?
  FIRST COMMONER. Why, sir, a carpenter.
  MARULLUS. Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
    What dost thou with thy best apparel on?
    You, sir, what trade are you?
  SECOND COMMONER. Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am
    but, as you would say, a cobbler.
  MARULLUS. But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.
  SECOND COMMONER. A trade, sir, that, I hope, I may use with a safe
    conscience, which is indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
  MARULLUS. What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what trade?
  SECOND COMMONER. Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me; yet,
    if you be out, sir, I can mend you.  
  MARULLUS. What mean'st thou by that? Mend me, thou saucy fellow!
  SECOND COMMONER. Why, sir, cobble you.
  FLAVIUS. Thou art a cobbler, art thou?
  SECOND COMMONER. Truly, Sir, all that I live by is with the awl; I
    meddle with no tradesman's matters, nor women's matters, but with
    awl. I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes; when they are in
    great danger, I recover them. As proper men as ever trod upon
    neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.
  FLAVIUS. But wherefore art not in thy shop today?
    Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
  SECOND COMMONER. Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes to get myself
    into more work. But indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar
    and to rejoice in his triumph.
  MARULLUS. Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?
    What tributaries follow him to Rome
    To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
    You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!
    O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
    Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
    Have you climb'd up to walls and battlements,  
    To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops,
    Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
    The livelong day with patient expectation
    To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
    And when you saw his chariot but appear,
    Have you not made an universal shout
    That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
    To hear the replication of your sounds
    Made in her concave shores?
    And do you now put on your best attire?
    And do you now cull out a holiday?
    And do you now strew flowers in his way
    That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?
    Be gone!
    Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
    Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
    That needs must light on this ingratitude.
  FLAVIUS. Go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault,
    Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
    Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears  
    Into the channel, till the lowest stream
    Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
                                           Exeunt all Commoners.
    See whether their basest metal be not moved;
    They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
    Go you down that way towards the Capitol;
    This way will I. Disrobe the images
    If you do find them deck'd with ceremonies.
  MARULLUS. May we do so?
    You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
  FLAVIUS. It is no matter; let no images
    Be hung with Caesar's trophies. I'll about
    And drive away the vulgar from the streets;
    So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
    These growing feathers pluck'd from Caesar's wing
    Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
    Who else would soar above the view of men
    And keep us all in servile fearfulness.              Exeunt.




SCENE II.
A public place.

Flourish. Enter Caesar; Antony, for the course; Calpurnia, Portia,
Decius, Cicero, Brutus, Cassius, and Casca; a great crowd follows,
among them a Soothsayer.

  CAESAR. Calpurnia!
  CASCA. Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.
                                                   Music ceases.
  CAESAR. Calpurnia!
  CALPURNIA. Here, my lord.
  CAESAR. Stand you directly in Antonio's way,
    When he doth run his course. Antonio!
  ANTONY. Caesar, my lord?
  CAESAR. Forget not in your speed, Antonio,
    To touch Calpurnia, for our elders say
    The barren, touched in this holy chase,
    Shake off their sterile curse.
  ANTONY. I shall remember.
    When Caesar says "Do this," it is perform'd.
  CAESAR. Set on, and leave no ceremony out.           Flourish.  
  SOOTHSAYER. Caesar!
  CAESAR. Ha! Who calls?
  CASCA. Bid every noise be still. Peace yet again!
  CAESAR. Who is it in the press that calls on me?
    I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,
    Cry "Caesar." Speak, Caesar is turn'd to hear.
  SOOTHSAYER. Beware the ides of March.
  CAESAR. What man is that?
  BRUTUS. A soothsayer you beware the ides of March.
  CAESAR. Set him before me let me see his face.
  CASSIUS. Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.
  CAESAR. What say'st thou to me now? Speak once again.
  SOOTHSAYER. Beware the ides of March.
  CAESAR. He is a dreamer; let us leave him. Pass.
                      Sennet. Exeunt all but Brutus and Cassius.
  CASSIUS. Will you go see the order of the course?
  BRUTUS. Not I.
  CASSIUS. I pray you, do.
  BRUTUS. I am not gamesome; I do lack some part
    Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.  
    Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires;
    I'll leave you.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, I do observe you now of late;
    I have not from your eyes that gentleness
    And show of love as I was wont to have;
    You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
    Over your friend that loves you.
  BRUTUS. Cassius,
    Be not deceived; if I have veil'd my look,
    I turn the trouble of my countenance
    Merely upon myself. Vexed I am
    Of late with passions of some difference,
    Conceptions only proper to myself,
    Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors;
    But let not therefore my good friends be grieved-
    Among which number, Cassius, be you one-
    Nor construe any further my neglect
    Than that poor Brutus with himself at war
    Forgets the shows of love to other men.
  CASSIUS. Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,  
    By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
    Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
    Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?
  BRUTUS. No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself
    But by reflection, by some other things.
  CASSIUS. 'Tis just,
    And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
    That you have no such mirrors as will turn
    Your hidden worthiness into your eye
    That you might see your shadow. I have heard
    Where many of the best respect in Rome,
    Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus
    And groaning underneath this age's yoke,
    Have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes.
  BRUTUS. Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
    That you would have me seek into myself
    For that which is not in me?
  CASSIUS. Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear,
    And since you know you cannot see yourself
    So well as by reflection, I your glass  
    Will modestly discover to yourself
    That of yourself which you yet know not of.
    And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus;
    Were I a common laugher, or did use
    To stale with ordinary oaths my love
    To every new protester, if you know
    That I do fawn on men and hug them hard
    And after scandal them, or if you know
    That I profess myself in banqueting
    To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
                                             Flourish and shout.
  BRUTUS. What means this shouting? I do fear the people
    Choose Caesar for their king.
  CASSIUS. Ay, do you fear it?
    Then must I think you would not have it so.
  BRUTUS. I would not, Cassius, yet I love him well.
    But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
    What is it that you would impart to me?
    If it be aught toward the general good,
    Set honor in one eye and death i' the other  
    And I will look on both indifferently.
    For let the gods so speed me as I love
    The name of honor more than I fear death.
  CASSIUS. I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
    As well as I do know your outward favor.
    Well, honor is the subject of my story.
    I cannot tell what you and other men
    Think of this life, but, for my single self,
    I had as lief not be as live to be
    In awe of such a thing as I myself.
    I was born free as Caesar, so were you;
    We both have fed as well, and we can both
    Endure the winter's cold as well as he.
    For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
    The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
    Caesar said to me, "Darest thou, Cassius, now
    Leap in with me into this angry flood
    And swim to yonder point?" Upon the word,
    Accoutred as I was, I plunged in
    And bade him follow. So indeed he did.  
    The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
    With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
    And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
    But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
    Caesar cried, "Help me, Cassius, or I sink!
    I, as Aeneas our great ancestor
    Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
    The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
    Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
    Is now become a god, and Cassius is
    A wretched creature and must bend his body
    If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
    He had a fever when he was in Spain,
    And when the fit was on him I did mark
    How he did shake. 'Tis true, this god did shake;
    His coward lips did from their color fly,
    And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
    Did lose his luster. I did hear him groan.
    Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
    Mark him and write his speeches in their books,  
    Alas, it cried, "Give me some drink, Titinius,"
    As a sick girl. Ye gods! It doth amaze me
    A man of such a feeble temper should
    So get the start of the majestic world
    And bear the palm alone. Shout.                    Flourish.
  BRUTUS. Another general shout!
    I do believe that these applauses are
    For some new honors that are heap'd on Caesar.
  CASSIUS. Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
    Like a Colossus, and we petty men
    Walk under his huge legs and peep about
    To find ourselves dishonorable graves.
    Men at some time are masters of their fates:
    The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
    But in ourselves that we are underlings.
    Brutus and Caesar: what should be in that "Caesar"?
    Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
    Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
    Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
    Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,  
    "Brutus" will start a spirit as soon as "Caesar."
    Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
    Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed
    That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed!
    Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
    When went there by an age since the great flood
    But it was famed with more than with one man?
    When could they say till now that talk'd of Rome
    That her wide walls encompass'd but one man?
    Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough,
    When there is in it but one only man.
    O, you and I have heard our fathers say
    There was a Brutus once that would have brook'd
    The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome
    As easily as a king.
  BRUTUS. That you do love me, I am nothing jealous;
    What you would work me to, I have some aim.
    How I have thought of this and of these times,
    I shall recount hereafter; for this present,
    I would not, so with love I might entreat you,  
    Be any further moved. What you have said
    I will consider; what you have to say
    I will with patience hear, and find a time
    Both meet to hear and answer such high things.
    Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
    Brutus had rather be a villager
    Than to repute himself a son of Rome
    Under these hard conditions as this time
    Is like to lay upon us.
  CASSIUS. I am glad that my weak words
    Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.

            Re-enter Caesar and his Train.

  BRUTUS. The games are done, and Caesar is returning.
  CASSIUS. As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
    And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
    What hath proceeded worthy note today.
  BRUTUS. I will do so. But, look you, Cassius,
    The angry spot doth glow on Caesar's brow,  
    And all the rest look like a chidden train:
    Calpurnia's cheek is pale, and Cicero
    Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
    As we have seen him in the Capitol,
    Being cross'd in conference by some senators.
  CASSIUS. Casca will tell us what the matter is.
  CAESAR. Antonio!
  ANTONY. Caesar?
  CAESAR. Let me have men about me that are fat,
    Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep o' nights:
    Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;
    He thinks too much; such men are dangerous.
  ANTONY. Fear him not, Caesar; he's not dangerous;
    He is a noble Roman and well given.
  CAESAR. Would he were fatter! But I fear him not,
    Yet if my name were liable to fear,
    I do not know the man I should avoid
    So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
    He is a great observer, and he looks
    Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,  
    As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music;
    Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
    As if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit
    That could be moved to smile at anything.
    Such men as he be never at heart's ease
    Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
    And therefore are they very dangerous.
    I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd
    Than what I fear, for always I am Caesar.
    Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
    And tell me truly what thou think'st of him.
              Sennet. Exeunt Caesar and all his Train but Casca.
  CASCA. You pull'd me by the cloak; would you speak with me?
  BRUTUS. Ay, Casca, tell us what hath chanced today
    That Caesar looks so sad.
  CASCA. Why, you were with him, were you not?
  BRUTUS. I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.
  CASCA. Why, there was a crown offered him, and being offered him,
     he put it by with the back of his hand, thus, and then the
     people fell ashouting.  
  BRUTUS. What was the second noise for?
  CASCA. Why, for that too.
  CASSIUS. They shouted thrice. What was the last cry for?
  CASCA. Why, for that too.
  BRUTUS. Was the crown offered him thrice?
  CASCA. Ay, marry, wast, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler
    than other, and at every putting by mine honest neighbors
    shouted.
  CASSIUS. Who offered him the crown?
  CASCA. Why, Antony.
  BRUTUS. Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.
  CASCA. I can as well be hang'd as tell the manner of it. It was
    mere foolery; I did not mark it. I saw Mark Antony offer him a
    crown (yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these
    coronets) and, as I told you, he put it by once. But for all
    that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it. Then he offered
    it to him again; then he put it by again. But, to my thinking, he
    was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he offered it
    the third time; he put it the third time by; and still as he
    refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their chopped hands  
    and threw up their sweaty nightcaps and uttered such a deal of
    stinking breath because Caesar refused the crown that it had
    almost choked Caesar, for he swounded and fell down at it. And
    for mine own part, I durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips
    and receiving the bad air.
  CASSIUS. But, soft, I pray you, what, did Caesars wound?
  CASCA. He fell down in the marketplace and foamed at mouth and was
    speechless.
  BRUTUS. 'Tis very like. He hath the falling sickness.
  CASSIUS. No, Caesar hath it not, but you, and I,
    And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.
  CASCA. I know not what you mean by that, but I am sure Caesar fell
    down. If the tagrag people did not clap him and hiss him
    according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do
    the players in the theatre, I am no true man.
  BRUTUS. What said he when he came unto himself?
  CASCA. Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common
    herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his doublet
    and offered them his throat to cut. An had been a man of any
    occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word, I would I  
    might go to hell among the rogues. And so he fell. When he came
    to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything amiss,
    he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or
    four wenches where I stood cried, "Alas, good soul!" and forgave
    him with all their hearts. But there's no heed to be taken of
    them; if Caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would have done
    no less.
  BRUTUS. And after that he came, thus sad, away?
  CASCA. Ay.
  CASSIUS. Did Cicero say anything?
  CASCA. Ay, he spoke Greek.
  CASSIUS. To what effect?
  CASCA. Nay, an I tell you that, I'll ne'er look you i' the face
    again; but those that understood him smiled at one another and
    shook their heads; but for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I
    could tell you more news too: Marullus and Flavius, for pulling
    scarfs off Caesar's images, are put to silence. Fare you well.
    There was more foolery yet, if could remember it.
  CASSIUS. Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?
  CASCA. No, I am promised forth.  
  CASSIUS. Will you dine with me tomorrow?
  CASCA. Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and your dinner worth
    the eating.
  CASSIUS. Good, I will expect you.
  CASCA. Do so, farewell, both.                            Exit.
  BRUTUS. What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
    He was quick mettle when he went to school.
  CASSIUS. So is he now in execution
    Of any bold or noble enterprise,
    However he puts on this tardy form.
    This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
    Which gives men stomach to digest his words
    With better appetite.
  BRUTUS. And so it is. For this time I will leave you.
    Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
    I will come home to you, or, if you will,
    Come home to me and I will wait for you.
  CASSIUS. I will do so. Till then, think of the world.
                                                    Exit Brutus.
    Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet, I see  
    Thy honorable mettle may be wrought
    From that it is disposed; therefore it is meet
    That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
    For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
    Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
    If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius,
    He should not humor me. I will this night,
    In several hands, in at his windows throw,
    As if they came from several citizens,
    Writings, all tending to the great opinion
    That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
    Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at.
    And after this let Caesar seat him sure;
    For we will shake him, or worse days endure.           Exit.




SCENE III.
A street. Thunder and lightning.

Enter, from opposite sides, Casca, with his sword drawn, and Cicero.

  CICERO. Good even, Casca. Brought you Caesar home?
    Why are you breathless, and why stare you so?
  CASCA. Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
    Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,
    I have seen tempests when the scolding winds
    Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen
    The ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam
    To be exalted with the threatening clouds,
    But never till tonight, never till now,
    Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
    Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
    Or else the world too saucy with the gods
    Incenses them to send destruction.
  CICERO. Why, saw you anything more wonderful?
  CASCA. A common slave- you know him well by sight-
    Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn  
    Like twenty torches join'd, and yet his hand
    Not sensible of fire remain'd unscorch'd.
    Besides- I ha' not since put up my sword-
    Against the Capitol I met a lion,
    Who glaz'd upon me and went surly by
    Without annoying me. And there were drawn
    Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women
    Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
    Men all in fire walk up and down the streets.
    And yesterday the bird of night did sit
    Even at noonday upon the marketplace,
    Howling and shrieking. When these prodigies
    Do so conjointly meet, let not men say
    "These are their reasons; they are natural":
    For I believe they are portentous things
    Unto the climate that they point upon.
  CICERO. Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time.
    But men may construe things after their fashion,
    Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
    Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?  
  CASCA. He doth, for he did bid Antonio
    Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.
  CICERO. Good then, Casca. This disturbed sky
    Is not to walk in.
  CASCA. Farewell, Cicero.                          Exit Cicero.

                        Enter Cassius.

  CASSIUS. Who's there?
  CASCA. A Roman.
  CASSIUS. Casca, by your voice.
  CASCA. Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!
  CASSIUS. A very pleasing night to honest men.
  CASCA. Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
  CASSIUS. Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
    For my part, I have walk'd about the streets,
    Submitting me unto the perilous night,
    And thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
    Have bared my bosom to the thunderstone;
    And when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open  
    The breast of heaven, I did present myself
    Even in the aim and very flash of it.
  CASCA. But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
    It is the part of men to fear and tremble
    When the most mighty gods by tokens send
    Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
  CASSIUS. You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life
    That should be in a Roman you do want,
    Or else you use not. You look pale and gaze
    And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder
    To see the strange impatience of the heavens.
    But if you would consider the true cause
    Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
    Why birds and beasts from quality and kind,
    Why old men, fools, and children calculate,
    Why all these things change from their ordinance,
    Their natures, and preformed faculties
    To monstrous quality, why, you shall find
    That heaven hath infused them with these spirits
    To make them instruments of fear and warning  
    Unto some monstrous state.
    Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
    Most like this dreadful night,
    That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
    As doth the lion in the Capitol,
    A man no mightier than thyself or me
    In personal action, yet prodigious grown
    And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
  CASCA. 'Tis Caesar that you mean, is it not, Cassius?
  CASSIUS. Let it be who it is, for Romans now
    Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors.
    But, woe the while! Our fathers' minds are dead,
    And we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits;
    Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
  CASCA. Indeed they say the senators tomorrow
    Mean to establish Caesar as a king,
    And he shall wear his crown by sea and land
    In every place save here in Italy.
  CASSIUS. I know where I will wear this dagger then:
    Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.  
    Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
    Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat.
    Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
    Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron
    Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
    But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
    Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
    If I know this, know all the world besides,
    That part of tyranny that I do bear
    I can shake off at pleasure.                  Thunder still.
  CASCA. So can I.
    So every bondman in his own hand bears
    The power to cancel his captivity.
  CASSIUS. And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?
    Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf
    But that he sees the Romans are but sheep.
    He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
    Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
    Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome,
    What rubbish, and what offal, when it serves  
    For the base matter to illuminate
    So vile a thing as Caesar? But, O grief,
    Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this
    Before a willing bondman; then I know
    My answer must be made. But I am arm'd,
    And dangers are to me indifferent.
  CASCA. You speak to Casca, and to such a man
    That is no fleering tell-tale. Hold, my hand.
    Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
    And I will set this foot of mine as far
    As who goes farthest.
  CASSIUS. There's a bargain made.
    Now know you, Casca, I have moved already
    Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
    To undergo with me an enterprise
    Of honorable-dangerous consequence;
    And I do know by this, they stay for me
    In Pompey's Porch. For now, this fearful night,
    There is no stir or walking in the streets,
    And the complexion of the element  
    In favor's like the work we have in hand,
    Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.

                       Enter Cinna.

  CASCA. Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.
  CASSIUS. 'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait;
    He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so?
  CINNA. To find out you. Who's that? Metellus Cimber?
  CASSIUS. No, it is Casca, one incorporate
    To our attempts. Am I not stay'd for, Cinna?
  CINNA. I am glad on't. What a fearful night is this!
    There's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
  CASSIUS. Am I not stay'd for? Tell me.
  CINNA. Yes, you are.
    O Cassius, if you could
    But win the noble Brutus to our party-
  CASSIUS. Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper,
    And look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
    Where Brutus may but find it; and throw this  
    In at his window; set this up with wax
    Upon old Brutus' statue. All this done,
    Repair to Pompey's Porch, where you shall find us.
    Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
  CINNA. All but Metellus Cimber, and he's gone
    To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie
    And so bestow these papers as you bade me.
  CASSIUS. That done, repair to Pompey's Theatre.
                                                     Exit Cinna.
    Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
    See Brutus at his house. Three parts of him
    Is ours already, and the man entire
    Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
  CASCA. O, he sits high in all the people's hearts,
    And that which would appear offense in us,
    His countenance, like richest alchemy,
    Will change to virtue and to worthiness.
  CASSIUS. Him and his worth and our great need of him
    You have right well conceited. Let us go,
    For it is after midnight, and ere day  
    We will awake him and be sure of him.                Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.

Enter Brutus in his orchard.

  BRUTUS. What, Lucius, ho!
    I cannot, by the progress of the stars,
    Give guess how near to day. Lucius, I say!
    I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
    When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!

                            Enter Lucius.

  LUCIUS. Call'd you, my lord?
  BRUTUS. Get me a taper in my study, Lucius.
    When it is lighted, come and call me here.
  LUCIUS. I will, my lord.                                 Exit.
  BRUTUS. It must be by his death, and, for my part,
    I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
    But for the general. He would be crown'd:
    How that might change his nature, there's the question.
    It is the bright day that brings forth the adder
    And that craves wary walking. Crown him that,  
    And then, I grant, we put a sting in him
    That at his will he may do danger with.
    The abuse of greatness is when it disjoins
    Remorse from power, and, to speak truth of Caesar,
    I have not known when his affections sway'd
    More than his reason. But 'tis a common proof
    That lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
    Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
    But when he once attains the upmost round,
    He then unto the ladder turns his back,
    Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
    By which he did ascend. So Caesar may;
    Then, lest he may, prevent. And, since the quarrel
    Will bear no color for the thing he is,
    Fashion it thus, that what he is, augmented,
    Would run to these and these extremities;
    And therefore think him as a serpent's egg
    Which hatch'd would as his kind grow mischievous,
    And kill him in the shell.
  
                        Re-enter Lucius.

  LUCIUS. The taper burneth in your closet, sir.
    Searching the window for a flint I found
    This paper thus seal'd up, and I am sure
    It did not lie there when I went to bed.
                                           Gives him the letter.
  BRUTUS. Get you to bed again, it is not day.
    Is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of March?
  LUCIUS. I know not, sir.
  BRUTUS. Look in the calendar and bring me word.
  LUCIUS. I will, sir.                                     Exit.
  BRUTUS. The exhalations whizzing in the air
    Give so much light that I may read by them.
                                     Opens the letter and reads.
    "Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake and see thyself!
    Shall Rome, etc. Speak, strike, redress!"

    "Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake!"
    Such instigations have been often dropp'd  
    Where I have took them up.
    "Shall Rome, etc." Thus must I piece it out.
    Shall Rome stand under one man's awe? What, Rome?
    My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
    The Tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king.
    "Speak, strike, redress!" Am I entreated
    To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
    If the redress will follow, thou receivest
    Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus!

                        Re-enter Lucius.

  LUCIUS. Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.
                                                Knocking within.
  BRUTUS. 'Tis good. Go to the gate, somebody knocks.
                                                    Exit Lucius.
    Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar
    I have not slept.
    Between the acting of a dreadful thing
    And the first motion, all the interim is  
    Like a phantasma or a hideous dream;
    The genius and the mortal instruments
    Are then in council, and the state of man,
    Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
    The nature of an insurrection.

                         Re-enter Lucius.

  LUCIUS. Sir, 'tis your brother Cassius at the door,
    Who doth desire to see you.
  BRUTUS. Is he alone?
  LUCIUS. No, sir, there are more with him.
  BRUTUS. Do you know them?
  LUCIUS. No, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears,
    And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
    That by no means I may discover them
    By any mark of favor.
  BRUTUS. Let 'em enter.                            Exit Lucius.
    They are the faction. O Conspiracy,
    Shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,  
    When evils are most free? O, then, by day
    Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
    To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, Conspiracy;
    Hide it in smiles and affability;
    For if thou path, thy native semblance on,
    Not Erebus itself were dim enough
    To hide thee from prevention.

    Enter the conspirators, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Cinna,
                Metellus Cimber, and Trebonius.

  CASSIUS. I think we are too bold upon your rest.
    Good morrow, Brutus, do we trouble you?
  BRUTUS. I have been up this hour, awake all night.
    Know I these men that come along with you?
  CASSIUS. Yes, every man of them, and no man here
    But honors you, and every one doth wish
    You had but that opinion of yourself
    Which every noble Roman bears of you.
    This is Trebonius.  
  BRUTUS. He is welcome hither.
  CASSIUS. This, Decius Brutus.
  BRUTUS. He is welcome too.
CASSIUS. This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.
  BRUTUS. They are all welcome.
    What watchful cares do interpose themselves
    Betwixt your eyes and night?
  CASSIUS. Shall I entreat a word?                 They whisper.
  DECIUS. Here lies the east. Doth not the day break here?
  CASCA. No.
  CINNA. O, pardon, sir, it doth, and yongrey lines
    That fret the clouds are messengers of day.
  CASCA. You shall confess that you are both deceived.
    Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,
    Which is a great way growing on the south,
    Weighing the youthful season of the year.
    Some two months hence up higher toward the north
    He first presents his fire, and the high east
    Stands as the Capitol, directly here.
  BRUTUS. Give me your hands all over, one by one.
  CASSIUS. And let us swear our resolution.  
  BRUTUS. No, not an oath. If not the face of men,
    The sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse-
    If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
    And every man hence to his idle bed;
    So let high-sighted tyranny range on
    Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,
    As I am sure they do, bear fire enough
    To kindle cowards and to steel with valor
    The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,
    What need we any spur but our own cause
    To prick us to redress? What other bond
    Than secret Romans that have spoke the word
    And will not palter? And what other oath
    Than honesty to honesty engaged
    That this shall be or we will fall for it?
    Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,
    Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls
    That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear
    Such creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
    The even virtue of our enterprise,  
    Nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
    To think that or our cause or our performance
    Did need an oath; when every drop of blood
    That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,
    Is guilty of a several bastardy
    If he do break the smallest particle
    Of any promise that hath pass'd from him.
  CASSIUS. But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
    I think he will stand very strong with us.
  CASCA. Let us not leave him out.
  CINNA. No, by no means.
  METELLUS. O, let us have him, for his silver hairs
    Will purchase us a good opinion,
    And buy men's voices to commend our deeds.
    It shall be said his judgement ruled our hands;
    Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
    But all be buried in his gravity.
  BRUTUS. O, name him not; let us not break with him,
    For he will never follow anything
    That other men begin.  
  CASSIUS. Then leave him out.
  CASCA. Indeed he is not fit.
  DECIUS. Shall no man else be touch'd but only Caesar?
  CASSIUS. Decius, well urged. I think it is not meet
    Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,
    Should outlive Caesar. We shall find of him
    A shrewd contriver; and you know his means,
    If he improve them, may well stretch so far
    As to annoy us all, which to prevent,
    Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
  BRUTUS. Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
    To cut the head off and then hack the limbs
    Like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
    For Antony is but a limb of Caesar.
    Let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.
    We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
    And in the spirit of men there is no blood.
    O, that we then could come by Caesar's spirit,
    And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
    Caesar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,  
    Let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
    Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
    Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds;
    And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
    Stir up their servants to an act of rage
    And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make
    Our purpose necessary and not envious,
    Which so appearing to the common eyes,
    We shall be call'd purgers, not murderers.
    And for Mark Antony, think not of him,
    For he can do no more than Caesar's arm
    When Caesar's head is off.
  CASSIUS. Yet I fear him,
    For in the ingrated love he bears to Caesar-
  BRUTUS. Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him.
    If he love Caesar, all that he can do
    Is to himself, take thought and die for Caesar.
    And that were much he should, for he is given
    To sports, to wildness, and much company.
  TREBONIUS. There is no fear in him-let him not die,  
    For he will live and laugh at this hereafter.
                                                  Clock strikes.
  BRUTUS. Peace, count the clock.
  CASSIUS. The clock hath stricken three.
  TREBONIUS. 'Tis time to part.
  CASSIUS. But it is doubtful yet
    Whether Caesar will come forth today or no,
    For he is superstitious grown of late,
    Quite from the main opinion he held once
    Of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
    It may be these apparent prodigies,
    The unaccustom'd terror of this night,
    And the persuasion of his augurers
    May hold him from the Capitol today.
  DECIUS. Never fear that. If he be so resolved,
    I can o'ersway him, for he loves to hear
    That unicorns may be betray'd with trees,
    And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
    Lions with toils, and men with flatterers;
    But when I tell him he hates flatterers,  
    He says he does, being then most flattered.
    Let me work;
    For I can give his humor the true bent,
    And I will bring him to the Capitol.
  CASSIUS. Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
  BRUTUS. By the eighth hour. Is that the utter most?
  CINNA. Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
  METELLUS. Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
    Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey.
    I wonder none of you have thought of him.
  BRUTUS. Now, good Metellus, go along by him.
    He loves me well, and I have given him reasons;
    Send him but hither, and I'll fashion him.
  CASSIUS. The morning comes upon 's. We'll leave you, Brutus,
    And, friends, disperse yourselves, but all remember
    What you have said and show yourselves true Romans.
  BRUTUS. Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily;
    Let not our looks put on our purposes,
    But bear it as our Roman actors do,
    With untired spirits and formal constancy.  
    And so, good morrow to you every one.
                                          Exeunt all but Brutus.
    Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter.
    Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber;
    Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
    Which busy care draws in the brains of men;
    Therefore thou sleep'st so sound.

                           Enter Portia.

  PORTIA. Brutus, my lord!
  BRUTUS. Portia, what mean you? Wherefore rise you now?
    It is not for your health thus to commit
    Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.
  PORTIA. Nor for yours neither. have ungently, Brutus,
    Stole from my bed; and yesternight at supper
    You suddenly arose and walk'd about,
    Musing and sighing, with your arms across;
    And when I ask'd you what the matter was,
    You stared upon me with ungentle looks.  
    I urged you further; then you scratch'd your head,
    And too impatiently stamp'd with your foot.
    Yet I insisted, yet you answer'd not,
    But with an angry waiter of your hand
    Gave sign for me to leave you. So I did,
    Fearing to strengthen that impatience
    Which seem'd too much enkindled, and withal
    Hoping it was but an effect of humor,
    Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
    It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep,
    And, could it work so much upon your shape
    As it hath much prevail'd on your condition,
    I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord,
    Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
  BRUTUS. I am not well in health, and that is all.
  PORTIA. Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
    He would embrace the means to come by it.
  BRUTUS. Why, so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.
  PORTIA. Is Brutus sick, and is it physical
    To walk unbraced and suck up the humors  
    Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
    And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
    To dare the vile contagion of the night
    And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
    To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus,
    You have some sick offense within your mind,
    Which by the right and virtue of my place
    I ought to know of; and, upon my knees,
    I charm you, by my once commended beauty,
    By all your vows of love and that great vow
    Which did incorporate and make us one,
    That you unfold to me, yourself, your half,
    Why you are heavy and what men tonight
    Have had resort to you; for here have been
    Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
    Even from darkness.
  BRUTUS. Kneel not, gentle Portia.
  PORTIA. I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
    Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
    Is it excepted I should know no secrets  
    That appertain to you? Am I yourself
    But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
    To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
    And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs
    Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
    Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.
  BRUTUS. You are my true and honorable wife,
    As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
    That visit my sad heart.
  PORTIA. If this were true, then should I know this secret.
    I grant I am a woman, but withal
    A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife.
    I grant I am a woman, but withal
    A woman well reputed, Cato's daughter.
    Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
    Being so father'd and so husbanded?
    Tell me your counsels, I will not disclose 'em.
    I have made strong proof of my constancy,
    Giving myself a voluntary wound
    Here in the thigh. Can I bear that with patience  
    And not my husband's secrets?
  BRUTUS. O ye gods,
    Render me worthy of this noble wife! Knocking within.
    Hark, hark, one knocks. Portia, go in awhile,
    And by and by thy bosom shall partake
    The secrets of my heart.
    All my engagements I will construe to thee,
    All the charactery of my sad brows.
    Leave me with haste. [Exit Portia.] Lucius, who's that knocks?

                  Re-enter Lucius with Ligarius.

  LUCIUS. Here is a sick man that would speak with you.
  BRUTUS. Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
    Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius, how?
  LIGARIUS. Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
  BRUTUS. O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,
    To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!
  LIGARIUS. I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
    Any exploit worthy the name of honor.  
  BRUTUS. Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
    Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
  LIGARIUS. By all the gods that Romans bow before,
    I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome!
    Brave son, derived from honorable loins!
    Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up
    My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
    And I will strive with things impossible,
    Yea, get the better of them. What's to do?
  BRUTUS. A piece of work that will make sick men whole.
  LIGARIUS. But are not some whole that we must make sick?
  BRUTUS. That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
    I shall unfold to thee, as we are going
    To whom it must be done.
  LIGARIUS. Set on your foot,
    And with a heart new-fired I follow you,
    To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
    That Brutus leads me on.
  BRUTUS. Follow me then.                                Exeunt.




SCENE II.
Caesar's house. Thunder and lightning.

Enter Caesar, in his nightgown.

  CAESAR. Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight.
    Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out,
    "Help, ho! They murther Caesar!" Who's within?

                         Enter a Servant.

  SERVANT. My lord?
  CAESAR. Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
    And bring me their opinions of success.
  SERVANT. I will, my lord.                                Exit.

                         Enter Calpurnia.

  CALPURNIA. What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
    You shall not stir out of your house today.
  CAESAR. Caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me
    Ne'er look'd but on my back; when they shall see  
    The face of Caesar, they are vanished.
  CALPURNIA. Caesar, I I stood on ceremonies,
    Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
    Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
    Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
    A lioness hath whelped in the streets;
    And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead;
    Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
    In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
    Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
    The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
    Horses did neigh and dying men did groan,
    And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
    O Caesar! These things are beyond all use,
    And I do fear them.
  CAESAR. What can be avoided
    Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
    Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions
    Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
  CALPURNIA. When beggars die, there are no comets seen;  
    The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
  CAESAR. Cowards die many times before their deaths;
    The valiant never taste of death but once.
    Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
    It seems to me most strange that men should fear
    Seeing that death, a necessary end,
    Will come when it will come.

                      Re-enter Servant.

    What say the augurers?
  SERVANT. They would not have you to stir forth today.
    Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
    They could not find a heart within the beast.
  CAESAR. The gods do this in shame of cowardice.
    Caesar should be a beast without a heart
    If he should stay at home today for fear.
    No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well
    That Caesar is more dangerous than he.
    We are two lions litter'd in one day,  
    And I the elder and more terrible.
    And Caesar shall go forth.
  CALPURNIA. Alas, my lord,
    Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
    Do not go forth today. Call it my fear
    That keeps you in the house and not your own.
    We'll send Mark Antony to the Senate House,
    And he shall say you are not well today.
    Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
  CAESAR. Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
    And, for thy humor, I will stay at home.

                        Enter Decius.

    Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.
  DECIUS. Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar!
    I come to fetch you to the Senate House.
  CAESAR. And you are come in very happy time
    To bear my greeting to the senators
    And tell them that I will not come today.  
    Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser:
    I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.
  CALPURNIA. Say he is sick.
  CAESAR. Shall Caesar send a lie?
    Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far
    To be afeard to tell greybeards the truth?
    Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
  DECIUS. Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
    Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so.
  CAESAR. The cause is in my will: I will not come,
    That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
    But, for your private satisfaction,
    Because I love you, I will let you know.
    Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home;
    She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
    Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
    Did run pure blood, and many lusty Romans
    Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.
    And these does she apply for warnings and portents
    And evils imminent, and on her knee  
    Hath begg'd that I will stay at home today.
  DECIUS. This dream is all amiss interpreted;
    It was a vision fair and fortunate.
    Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
    In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
    Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
    Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
    For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
    This by Calpurnia's dream is signified.
  CAESAR. And this way have you well expounded it.
  DECIUS. I have, when you have heard what I can say.
    And know it now, the Senate have concluded
    To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
    If you shall send them word you will not come,
    Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
    Apt to be render'd, for someone to say
    "Break up the Senate till another time,
    When Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams."
    If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
    "Lo, Caesar is afraid"?  
    Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love
    To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
    And reason to my love is liable.
  CAESAR. How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia!
    I am ashamed I did yield to them.
    Give me my robe, for I will go.

         Enter Publius, Brutus, Ligarius, Metellus, Casca,
                     Trebonius, and Cinna.

    And look where Publius is come to fetch me.
  PUBLIUS. Good morrow,Caesar.
  CAESAR. Welcome, Publius.
    What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?
    Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,
    Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
    As that same ague which hath made you lean.
    What is't o'clock?
  BRUTUS. Caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
  CAESAR. I thank you for your pains and courtesy.  

                           Enter Antony.

    See, Antony, that revels long o' nights,
    Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony.
  ANTONY. So to most noble Caesar.
  CAESAR. Bid them prepare within.
    I am to blame to be thus waited for.
    Now, Cinna; now, Metellus; what, Trebonius,
    I have an hour's talk in store for you;
    Remember that you call on me today;
    Be near me, that I may remember you.
  TREBONIUS. Caesar, I will. [Aside.] And so near will I be
    That your best friends shall wish I had been further.
  CAESAR. Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
    And we like friends will straightway go together.
  BRUTUS. [Aside.] That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
    The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon!            Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A street near the Capitol.

Enter Artemidorus, reading paper.

  ARTEMIDORUS. "Caesar, beware of Brutus; take heed of Cassius; come
    not near Casca; have an eye to Cinna; trust not Trebonius; mark
    well Metellus Cimber; Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast
    wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these men,
    and it is bent against Caesar. If thou beest not immortal, look
    about you. Security gives way to conspiracy. The mighty gods
    defend thee!
                                        Thy lover, Artemidorus."
    Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,
    And as a suitor will I give him this.
    My heart laments that virtue cannot live
    Out of the teeth of emulation.
    If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayest live;
    If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.           Exit.




SCENE IV.
Another part of the same street, before the house of Brutus.

Enter Portia and Lucius.

  PORTIA. I prithee, boy, run to the Senate House;
    Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
    Why dost thou stay?
  LUCIUS. To know my errand, madam.
  PORTIA. I would have had thee there, and here again,
    Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
    O constancy, be strong upon my side!
    Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue!
    I have a man's mind, but a woman's might.
    How hard it is for women to keep counsel!
    Art thou here yet?
  LUCIUS. Madam, what should I do?
    Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
    And so return to you, and nothing else?
  PORTIA. Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
    For he went sickly forth; and take good note
    What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.  
    Hark, boy, what noise is that?
  LUCIUS. I hear none, madam.
  PORTIA. Prithee, listen well.
    I heard a bustling rumor like a fray,
    And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
  LUCIUS. Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.

                     Enter the Soothsayer.

  PORTIA. Come hither, fellow;
    Which way hast thou been?
  SOOTHSAYER. At mine own house, good lady.
  PORTIA. What is't o'clock?
  SOOTHSAYER. About the ninth hour, lady.
  PORTIA. Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
  SOOTHSAYER. Madam, not yet. I go to take my stand
    To see him pass on to the Capitol.
  PORTIA. Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?
  SOOTHSAYER. That I have, lady. If it will please Caesar
    To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,  
    I shall beseech him to befriend himself.
  PORTIA. Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?
  SOOTHSAYER. None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.
    Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow,
    The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
    Of senators, of praetors, common suitors,
    Will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
    I'll get me to a place more void and there
    Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.               Exit.
  PORTIA. I must go in. Ay me, how weak a thing
    The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
    The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
    Sure, the boy heard me. Brutus hath a suit
    That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint.
    Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord;
    Say I am merry. Come to me again,
    And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
                                               Exeunt severally.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting above.
A crowd of people, among them Artemidorus and the Soothsayer.

Flourish. Enter Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Metellus,
Trebonius, Cinna, Antony, Lepidus, Popilius, Publius, and others.

  CAESAR. The ides of March are come.
  SOOTHSAYER. Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
  A Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.
  DECIUS. Trebonius doth desire you to o'er read,
    At your best leisure, this his humble suit.
  ARTEMIDORUS. O Caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit
    That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.
  CAESAR. What touches us ourself shall be last served.
  ARTEMIDORUS. Delay not, Caesar; read it instantly.
  CAESAR. What, is the fellow mad?
  PUBLIUS. Sirrah, give place.
  CASSIUS. What, urge you your petitions in the street?
    Come to the Capitol.
  
      Caesar goes up to the Senate House, the rest follow.

  POPILIUS. I wish your enterprise today may thrive.
  CASSIUS. What enterprise, Popilius?
  POPILIUS. Fare you well.
                                             Advances to Caesar.
  BRUTUS. What said Popilius Lena?
  CASSIUS. He wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.
    I fear our purpose is discovered.
  BRUTUS. Look, how he makes to Caesar. Mark him.
  CASSIUS. Casca,
    Be sudden, for we fear prevention.
    Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
    Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
    For I will slay myself.
  BRUTUS. Cassius, be constant.
    Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;
    For, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
  CASSIUS. Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus,
    He draws Mark Antony out of the way.  
                                    Exeunt Antony and Trebonius.
  DECIUS. Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him
    And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
  BRUTUS. He is address'd; press near and second him.
  CINNA. Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
  CAESAR. Are we all ready? What is now amiss
    That Caesar and his Senate must redress?
  METELLUS. Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
    Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
    An humble heart.                                     Kneels.
  CAESAR. I must prevent thee, Cimber.
    These couchings and these lowly courtesies
    Might fire the blood of ordinary men
    And turn preordinance and first decree
    Into the law of children. Be not fond
    To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
    That will be thaw'd from the true quality
    With that which melteth fools- I mean sweet words,
    Low-crooked court'sies, and base spaniel-fawning.
    Thy brother by decree is banished.  
    If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
    I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
    Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
    Will he be satisfied.
  METELLUS. Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
    To sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear
    For the repealing of my banish'd brother?
  BRUTUS. I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,
    Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
    Have an immediate freedom of repeal.
  CAESAR. What, Brutus?
  CASSIUS. Pardon, Caesar! Caesar, pardon!
    As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
    To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
  CAESAR. I could be well moved, if I were as you;
    If I could pray to move, prayers would move me;
    But I am constant as the northern star,
    Of whose true-fix'd and resting quality
    There is no fellow in the firmament.
    The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks;  
    They are all fire and every one doth shine;
    But there's but one in all doth hold his place.
    So in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
    And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
    Yet in the number I do know but one
    That unassailable holds on his rank,
    Unshaked of motion; and that I am he,
    Let me a little show it, even in this;
    That I was constant Cimber should be banish'd,
    And constant do remain to keep him so.
  CINNA. O Caesar-
  CAESAR. Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
  DECIUS. Great Caesar-
  CAESAR. Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
  CASCA. Speak, hands, for me!
                        Casca first, then the other Conspirators
                                  and Marcus Brutus stab Caesar.
  CAESAR. Et tu, Brute?- Then fall, Caesar! Dies.
  CINNA. Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
    Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.  
  CASSIUS. Some to the common pulpits and cry out
    "Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
  BRUTUS. People and senators, be not affrighted,
    Fly not, stand still; ambition's debt is paid.
  CASCA. Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
  DECIUS. And Cassius too.
  BRUTUS. Where's Publius?
  CINNA. Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
  METELLUS. Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar's
    Should chance-
  BRUTUS. Talk not of standing. Publius, good cheer,
    There is no harm intended to your person,
    Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.
  CASSIUS. And leave us, Publius, lest that the people
    Rushing on us should do your age some mischief.
  BRUTUS. Do so, and let no man abide this deed
    But we the doers.

                        Re-enter Trebonius.
  
  CASSIUS. Where is Antony?
  TREBONIUS. Fled to his house amazed.
    Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
    As it were doomsday.
  BRUTUS. Fates, we will know your pleasures.
    That we shall die, we know; 'tis but the time
    And drawing days out that men stand upon.
  CASSIUS. Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
    Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
  BRUTUS. Grant that, and then is death a benefit;
    So are we Caesar's friends that have abridged
    His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
    And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood
    Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords;
    Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
    And waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
    Let's all cry, "Peace, freedom, and liberty!"
  CASSIUS. Stoop then, and wash. How many ages hence
    Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
    In states unborn and accents yet unknown!  
  BRUTUS. How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
    That now on Pompey's basis lies along
    No worthier than the dust!
  CASSIUS. So oft as that shall be,
    So often shall the knot of us be call'd
    The men that gave their country liberty.
  DECIUS. What, shall we forth?
  CASSIUS. Ay, every man away.
    Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
    With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.

                        Enter a Servant.

  BRUTUS. Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antony's.
  SERVANT. Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel,
    Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
    And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
    Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
    Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
    Say I love Brutus and I honor him;  
    Say I fear'd Caesar, honor'd him, and loved him.
    If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
    May safely come to him and be resolved
    How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
    Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
    So well as Brutus living, but will follow
    The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
    Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
    With all true faith. So says my master Antony.
  BRUTUS. Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
    I never thought him worse.
    Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
    He shall be satisfied and, by my honor,
    Depart untouch'd.
  SERVANT. I'll fetch him presently.                       Exit.
  BRUTUS. I know that we shall have him well to friend.
  CASSIUS. I wish we may, but yet have I a mind
    That fears him much, and my misgiving still
    Falls shrewdly to the purpose.
  
                          Re-enter Antony.

  BRUTUS. But here comes Antony. Welcome, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lie so low?
    Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
    Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
    I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
    Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
    If I myself, there is no hour so fit
    As Caesar's death's hour, nor no instrument
    Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
    With the most noble blood of all this world.
    I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
    Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
    Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
    I shall not find myself so apt to die;
    No place will please me so, no means of death,
    As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
    The choice and master spirits of this age.
  BRUTUS. O Antony, beg not your death of us!  
    Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
    As, by our hands and this our present act
    You see we do, yet see you but our hands
    And this the bleeding business they have done.
    Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
    And pity to the general wrong of Rome-
    As fire drives out fire, so pity pity-
    Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
    To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony;
    Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts
    Of brothers' temper, do receive you in
    With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
  CASSIUS. Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
    In the disposing of new dignities.
  BRUTUS. Only be patient till we have appeased
    The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    And then we will deliver you the cause
    Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
    Have thus proceeded.
  ANTONY. I doubt not of your wisdom.  
    Let each man render me his bloody hand.
    First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
    Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand;
    Now, Decius Brutus, yours; now yours, Metellus;
    Yours, Cinna; and, my valiant Casca, yours;
    Though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
    Gentlemen all- alas, what shall I say?
    My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
    That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
    Either a coward or a flatterer.
    That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true!
    If then thy spirit look upon us now,
    Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
    To see thy Antony making his peace,
    Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,
    Most noble! In the presence of thy corse?
    Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
    Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
    It would become me better than to close
    In terms of friendship with thine enemies.  
    Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart,
    Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand,
    Sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy Lethe.
    O world, thou wast the forest to this hart,
    And this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
    How like a deer strucken by many princes
    Dost thou here lie!
  CASSIUS. Mark Antony-
  ANTONY. Pardon me, Caius Cassius.
    The enemies of Caesar shall say this:
    Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
  CASSIUS. I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
    But what compact mean you to have with us?
    Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
    Or shall we on, and not depend on you?
  ANTONY. Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
    Sway'd from the point by looking down on Caesar.
    Friends am I with you all and love you all,
    Upon this hope that you shall give me reasons
    Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.  
  BRUTUS. Or else were this a savage spectacle.
    Our reasons are so full of good regard
    That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
    You should be satisfied.
  ANTONY. That's all I seek;
    And am moreover suitor that I may
    Produce his body to the marketplace,
    And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
    Speak in the order of his funeral.
  BRUTUS. You shall, Mark Antony.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, a word with you.
    [Aside to Brutus.] You know not what you do. Do not consent
    That Antony speak in his funeral.
    Know you how much the people may be moved
    By that which he will utter?
  BRUTUS. By your pardon,
    I will myself into the pulpit first,
    And show the reason of our Caesar's death.
    What Antony shall speak, I will protest
    He speaks by leave and by permission,  
    And that we are contented Caesar shall
    Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
    It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
  CASSIUS. I know not what may fall; I like it not.
  BRUTUS. Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar's body.
    You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
    But speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
    And say you do't by our permission,
    Else shall you not have any hand at all
    About his funeral. And you shall speak
    In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
    After my speech is ended.
  ANTONY. Be it so,
    I do desire no more.
  BRUTUS. Prepare the body then, and follow us.
                                          Exeunt all but Antony.
  ANTONY. O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
    That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
    Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
    That ever lived in the tide of times.  
    Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
    Over thy wounds now do I prophesy
    (Which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
    To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue)
    A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
    Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
    Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
    Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
    And dreadful objects so familiar,
    That mothers shall but smile when they behold
    Their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;
    All pity choked with custom of fell deeds,
    And Caesar's spirit ranging for revenge,
    With Ate by his side come hot from hell,
    Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice
    Cry "Havoc!" and let slip the dogs of war,
    That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
    With carrion men, groaning for burial.

                        Enter a Servant.  

    You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
  SERVANT. I do, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
  SERVANT. He did receive his letters, and is coming,
    And bid me say to you by word of mouth-
    O Caesar!                                     Sees the body.
  ANTONY. Thy heart is big; get thee apart and weep.
    Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,
    Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
    Began to water. Is thy master coming?
  SERVANT. He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.
  ANTONY. Post back with speed and tell him what hath chanced.
    Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
    No Rome of safety for Octavius yet;
    Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet stay awhile,
    Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse
    Into the marketplace. There shall I try,
    In my oration, how the people take
    The cruel issue of these bloody men,  
    According to the which thou shalt discourse
    To young Octavius of the state of things.
    Lend me your hand.                Exeunt with Caesar's body.




SCENE II.
The Forum.

Enter Brutus and Cassius, and a throng of Citizens.

  CITIZENS. We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
  BRUTUS. Then follow me and give me audience, friends.
    Cassius, go you into the other street
    And part the numbers.
    Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
    Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
    And public reasons shall be rendered
    Of Caesar's death.
  FIRST CITIZEN. I will hear Brutus speak.
  SECOND CITIZEN. I will hear Cassius and compare their reasons,
    When severally we hear them rendered.
                               Exit Cassius, with some Citizens.
                                    Brutus goes into the pulpit.
  THIRD CITIZEN. The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence!
  BRUTUS. Be patient till the last.
    Romans, countrymen, and lovers! Hear me for my cause, and be
    silent, that you may hear. Believe me for mine honor, and have  
    respect to mine honor, that you may believe. Censure me in your
    wisdom, and awake your senses, that you may the better judge. If
    there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar's, to
    him I say that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his. If
    then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is
    my answer: Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome
    more. Had you rather Caesar were living and die all slaves, than
    that Caesar were dead to live all freemen? As Caesar loved me, I
    weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was
    valiant, I honor him; but as he was ambitious, I slew him. There
    is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor,
    and death for his ambition. Who is here so base that would be a
    bondman? If any, speak, for him have I offended. Who is here so
    rude that would not be a Roman? If any, speak, for him have I
    offended. Who is here so vile that will not love his country? If
    any, speak, for him have I offended. I pause for a reply.
  ALL. None, Brutus, none.
  BRUTUS. Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar
    than you shall do to Brutus. The question of his death is
    enrolled in the Capitol, his glory not extenuated, wherein he was  
    worthy, nor his offenses enforced, for which he suffered death.

              Enter Antony and others, with Caesar's body.

    Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had
    no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a
    place in the commonwealth, as which of you shall not? With this I
    depart- that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I
    have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my country
    to need my death.
  ALL. Live, Brutus, live, live!
  FIRST CITIZEN. Bring him with triumph home unto his house.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Give him a statue with his ancestors.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Let him be Caesar.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Caesar's better parts
    Shall be crown'd in Brutus.
  FIRST CITIZEN. We'll bring him to his house with shouts and
    clamors.
  BRUTUS. My countrymen-
  SECOND CITIZEN. Peace! Silence! Brutus speaks.  
  FIRST CITIZEN. Peace, ho!
  BRUTUS. Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
    And, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
    Do grace to Caesar's corse, and grace his speech
    Tending to Caesar's glories, which Mark Antony,
    By our permission, is allow'd to make.
    I do entreat you, not a man depart,
    Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.                  Exit.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Stay, ho, and let us hear Mark Antony.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Let him go up into the public chair;
    We'll hear him. Noble Antony, go up.
  ANTONY. For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.
                                           Goes into the pulpit.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. What does he say of Brutus?
  THIRD CITIZEN. He says, for Brutus' sake,
    He finds himself beholding to us all.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. 'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.
  FIRST CITIZEN. This Caesar was a tyrant.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Nay, that's certain.
    We are blest that Rome is rid of him.  
  SECOND CITIZEN. Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.
  ANTONY. You gentle Romans-
  ALL. Peace, ho! Let us hear him.
  ANTONY. Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears!
    I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
    The evil that men do lives after them,
    The good is oft interred with their bones;
    So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
    Hath told you Caesar was ambitious;
    If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
    And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.
    Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest-
    For Brutus is an honorable man;
    So are they all, all honorable men-
    Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.
    He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
    But Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And Brutus is an honorable man.
    He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
    Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.  
    Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
    When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
    Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And Brutus is an honorable man.
    You all did see that on the Lupercal
    I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
    Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And sure he is an honorable man.
    I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
    But here I am to speak what I do know.
    You all did love him once, not without cause;
    What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
    O judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
    And men have lost their reason. Bear with me;
    My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
    And I must pause till it come back to me.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
  SECOND CITIZEN. If thou consider rightly of the matter,  
    Caesar has had great wrong.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Has he, masters?
    I fear there will a worse come in his place.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown;
    Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.
  FIRST CITIZEN. If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
  THIRD CITIZEN. There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Now mark him, he begins again to speak.
  ANTONY. But yesterday the word of Caesar might
    Have stood against the world. Now lies he there,
    And none so poor to do him reverence.
    O masters! If I were disposed to stir
    Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
    I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
    Who, you all know, are honorable men.
    I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
    To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
    Than I will wrong such honorable men.
    But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;  
    I found it in his closet, 'tis his will.
    Let but the commons hear this testament-
    Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read-
    And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds
    And dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
    Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
    And, dying, mention it within their wills,
    Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
    Unto their issue.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. We'll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony.
  ALL. The will, the will! We will hear Caesar's will.
  ANTONY. Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it;
    It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
    You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
    And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
    It will inflame you, it will make you mad.
    'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,
    For if you should, O, what would come of it!
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Read the will; we'll hear it, Antony.
    You shall read us the will, Caesar's will.  
  ANTONY. Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
    I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it.
    I fear I wrong the honorable men
    Whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar; I do fear it.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. They were traitors. Honorable men!
  ALL. The will! The testament!
  SECOND CITIZEN. They were villains, murtherers. The will!
    Read the will!
  ANTONY. You will compel me then to read the will?
    Then make a ring about the corse of Caesar,
    And let me show you him that made the will.
    Shall I descend? And will you give me leave?
  ALL. Come down.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Descend.
                                  He comes down from the pulpit.
  THIRD CITIZEN. You shall have leave.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. A ring, stand round.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Stand from the hearse, stand from the body.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Room for Antony, most noble Antony.
  ANTONY. Nay, press not so upon me, stand far off.  
  ALL. Stand back; room, bear back!
  ANTONY. If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
    You all do know this mantle. I remember
    The first time ever Caesar put it on;
    'Twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
    That day he overcame the Nervii.
    Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through;
    See what a rent the envious Casca made;
    Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd;
    And as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
    Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,
    As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
    If Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no;
    For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel.
    Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!
    This was the most unkindest cut of all;
    For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
    Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
    Quite vanquish'd him. Then burst his mighty heart,
    And, in his mantle muffling up his face,  
    Even at the base of Pompey's statue,
    Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
    O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
    Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
    Whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us.
    O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel
    The dint of pity. These are gracious drops.
    Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
    Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here,
    Here is himself, marr'd, as you see, with traitors.
  FIRST CITIZEN. O piteous spectacle!
  SECOND CITIZEN. O noble Caesar!
  THIRD CITIZEN. O woeful day!
  FOURTH CITIZEN. O traitors villains!
  FIRST CITIZEN. O most bloody sight!
  SECOND CITIZEN. We will be revenged.
  ALL. Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill!
    Slay! Let not a traitor live!
  ANTONY. Stay, countrymen.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.  
  SECOND CITIZEN. We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die with
    him.
  ANTONY. Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
    To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
    They that have done this deed are honorable.
    What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
    That made them do it. They are wise and honorable,
    And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.
    I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
    I am no orator, as Brutus is;
    But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
    That love my friend, and that they know full well
    That gave me public leave to speak of him.
    For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
    Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
    To stir men's blood. I only speak right on;
    I tell you that which you yourselves do know;
    Show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor dumb mouths,
    And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
    And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony  
    Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue
    In every wound of Caesar that should move
    The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
  ALL. We'll mutiny.
  FIRST CITIZEN. We'll burn the house of Brutus.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Away, then! Come, seek the conspirators.
  ANTONY. Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.
  ALL. Peace, ho! Hear Antony, most noble Antony!
  ANTONY. Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
    Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
    Alas, you know not; I must tell you then.
    You have forgot the will I told you of.
  ALL. Most true, the will! Let's stay and hear the will.
  ANTONY. Here is the will, and under Caesar's seal.
    To every Roman citizen he gives,
    To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Most noble Caesar! We'll revenge his death.
  THIRD CITIZEN. O royal Caesar!
  ANTONY. Hear me with patience.
  ALL. Peace, ho!  
  ANTONY. Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
    His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
    On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,
    And to your heirs forever- common pleasures,
    To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
    Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?
  FIRST CITIZEN. Never, never. Come, away, away!
    We'll burn his body in the holy place
    And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.
    Take up the body.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Go fetch fire.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Pluck down benches.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Pluck down forms, windows, anything.
                                  Exeunt Citizens with the body.
  ANTONY. Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,
    Take thou what course thou wilt.

                        Enter a Servant.

    How now, fellow?  
  SERVANT. Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
  ANTONY. Where is he?
  SERVANT. He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.
  ANTONY. And thither will I straight to visit him.
    He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
    And in this mood will give us anything.
  SERVANT. I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
    Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
  ANTONY. Be like they had some notice of the people,
    How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.          Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A street.

Enter Cinna the poet.

  CINNA. I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar,
    And things unluckily charge my fantasy.
    I have no will to wander forth of doors,
    Yet something leads me forth.

                        Enter Citizens.

  FIRST CITIZEN. What is your name?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Whither are you going?
  THIRD CITIZEN. Where do you dwell?
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Are you a married man or a bachelor?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Answer every man directly.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Ay, and briefly.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Ay, and wisely.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Ay, and truly, you were best.
  CINNA. What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I
    a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly  
    and briefly, wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor.
  SECOND CITIZEN. That's as much as to say they are fools that marry.
    You'll bear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed directly.
  CINNA. Directly, I am going to Caesar's funeral.
  FIRST CITIZEN. As a friend or an enemy?
  CINNA. As a friend.
  SECOND CITIZEN. That matter is answered directly.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. For your dwelling, briefly.
  CINNA. Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Your name, sir, truly.
  CINNA. Truly, my name is Cinna.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator.
  CINNA. I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad
    verses.
  CINNA. I am not Cinna the conspirator.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. It is no matter, his name's Cinna. Pluck but his
    name out of his heart, and turn him going.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Tear him, tear him! Come, brands, ho, firebrands. To
    Brutus', to Cassius'; burn all. Some to Decius' house, and some  
    to Casca's, some to Ligarius'. Away, go!             Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
A house in Rome. Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus, seated at a table.

  ANTONY. These many then shall die, their names are prick'd.
  OCTAVIUS. Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus?
  LEPIDUS. I do consent-
  OCTAVIUS. Prick him down, Antony.
  LEPIDUS. Upon condition Publius shall not live,
    Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.
    But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house,
    Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
    How to cut off some charge in legacies.
  LEPIDUS. What, shall I find you here?
  OCTAVIUS. Or here, or at the Capitol.            Exit Lepidus.
  ANTONY. This is a slight unmeritable man,
    Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit,
    The three-fold world divided, he should stand
    One of the three to share it?
  OCTAVIUS. So you thought him,
    And took his voice who should be prick'd to die  
    In our black sentence and proscription.
  ANTONY. Octavius, I have seen more days than you,
    And though we lay these honors on this man
    To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads,
    He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
    To groan and sweat under the business,
    Either led or driven, as we point the way;
    And having brought our treasure where we will,
    Then take we down his load and turn him off,
    Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears
    And graze in commons.
  OCTAVIUS. You may do your will,
    But he's a tried and valiant soldier.
  ANTONY. So is my horse, Octavius, and for that
    I do appoint him store of provender.
    It is a creature that I teach to fight,
    To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
    His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.
    And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
    He must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;  
    A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
    On objects, arts, and imitations,
    Which, out of use and staled by other men,
    Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him
    But as a property. And now, Octavius,
    Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
    Are levying powers; we must straight make head;
    Therefore let our alliance be combined,
    Our best friends made, our means stretch'd;
    And let us presently go sit in council,
    How covert matters may be best disclosed,
    And open perils surest answered.
  OCTAVIUS. Let us do so, for we are at the stake,
    And bay'd about with many enemies;
    And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
    Millions of mischiefs.                               Exeunt.




SCENE II.
Camp near Sardis. Before Brutus' tent. Drum.

Enter Brutus, Lucilius, Lucius, and Soldiers; Titinius and Pindarus meet them.

  BRUTUS. Stand, ho!
  LUCILIUS. Give the word, ho, and stand.
  BRUTUS. What now, Lucilius, is Cassius near?
  LUCILIUS. He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
    To do you salutation from his master.
  BRUTUS. He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,
    In his own change, or by ill officers,
    Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
    Things done undone; but if he be at hand,
    I shall be satisfied.
  PINDARUS. I do not doubt
    But that my noble master will appear
    Such as he is, full of regard and honor.
  BRUTUS. He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius,
    How he received you. Let me be resolved.
  LUCILIUS. With courtesy and with respect enough,  
    But not with such familiar instances,
    Nor with such free and friendly conference,
    As he hath used of old.
  BRUTUS. Thou hast described
    A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucilius,
    When love begins to sicken and decay
    It useth an enforced ceremony.
    There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
    But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
    Make gallant show and promise of their mettle;
    But when they should endure the bloody spur,
    They fall their crests and like deceitful jades
    Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?
  LUCILIUS. They meant his night in Sard is to be quarter'd;
    The greater part, the horse in general,
    Are come with Cassius.                     Low march within.
  BRUTUS. Hark, he is arrived.
    March gently on to meet him.

                  Enter Cassius and his Powers.  

  CASSIUS. Stand, ho!
  BRUTUS. Stand, ho! Speak the word along.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Stand!
  SECOND SOLDIER. Stand!
  THIRD SOLDIER. Stand!
  CASSIUS. Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
  BRUTUS. Judge me, you gods! Wrong I mine enemies?
    And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
  CASSIUS. Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
    And when you do them-
  BRUTUS. Cassius, be content,
    Speak your griefs softly, I do know you well.
    Before the eyes of both our armies here,
    Which should perceive nothing but love from us,
    Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away;
    Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
    And I will give you audience.
  CASSIUS. Pindarus,
    Bid our commanders lead their charges off  
    A little from this ground.
  BRUTUS. Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man
    Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
    Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door.             Exeunt.




SCENE III.
Brutus' tent.

Enter Brutus and Cassius.

  CASSIUS. That you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:
    You have condemn'd and noted Lucius Pella
    For taking bribes here of the Sardians,
    Wherein my letters, praying on his side,
    Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
  BRUTUS. You wrong'd yourself to write in such a case.
  CASSIUS. In such a time as this it is not meet
    That every nice offense should bear his comment.
  BRUTUS. Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
    Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm,
    To sell and mart your offices for gold
    To undeservers.
  CASSIUS. I an itching palm?
    You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
    Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
  BRUTUS. The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
    And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.  
  CASSIUS. Chastisement?
  BRUTUS. Remember March, the ides of March remember.
    Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
    What villain touch'd his body, that did stab,
    And not for justice? What, shall one of us,
    That struck the foremost man of all this world
    But for supporting robbers, shall we now
    Contaminate our fingers with base bribes
    And sell the mighty space of our large honors
    For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
    I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
    Than such a Roman.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, bait not me,
    I'll not endure it. You forget yourself
    To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
    Older in practice, abler than yourself
    To make conditions.
  BRUTUS. Go to, you are not, Cassius.
  CASSIUS. I am.
  BRUTUS. I say you are not.  
  CASSIUS. Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;
    Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.
  BRUTUS. Away, slight man!
  CASSIUS. Is't possible?
  BRUTUS. Hear me, for I will speak.
    Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
    Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
  CASSIUS. O gods, ye gods! Must I endure all this?
  BRUTUS. All this? Ay, more. Fret till your proud heart break.
    Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
    And make your bondmen tremble. Must I bouge?
    Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
    Under your testy humor? By the gods,
    You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
    Though it do split you, for, from this day forth,
    I'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
    When you are waspish.
  CASSIUS. Is it come to this?
  BRUTUS. You say you are a better soldier:
    Let it appear so, make your vaunting true,  
    And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
    I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
  CASSIUS. You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
    I said, an elder soldier, not a better.
    Did I say "better"?
  BRUTUS. If you did, I care not.
  CASSIUS. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
  BRUTUS. Peace, peace! You durst not so have tempted him.
  CASSIUS. I durst not?
  BRUTUS. No.
  CASSIUS. What, durst not tempt him?
  BRUTUS. For your life you durst not.
  CASSIUS. Do not presume too much upon my love;
    I may do that I shall be sorry for.
  BRUTUS. You have done that you should be sorry for.
    There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
    For I am arm'd so strong in honesty,
    That they pass by me as the idle wind
    Which I respect not. I did send to you
    For certain sums of gold, which you denied me,  
    For I can raise no money by vile means.
    By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
    And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring
    From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
    By any indirection. I did send
    To you for gold to pay my legions,
    Which you denied me. Was that done like Cassius?
    Should I have answer'd Caius Cassius so?
    When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous
    To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
    Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
    Dash him to pieces!
  CASSIUS. I denied you not.
  BRUTUS. You did.
  CASSIUS. I did not. He was but a fool
    That brought my answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart.
    A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
    But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
  BRUTUS. I do not, till you practise them on me.
  CASSIUS. You love me not.  
  BRUTUS. I do not like your faults.
  CASSIUS. A friendly eye could never see such faults.
  BRUTUS. A flatterer's would not, though they do appear
    As huge as high Olympus.
  CASSIUS. Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
    Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
    For Cassius is aweary of the world:
    Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
    Check'd like a bondman; all his faults observed,
    Set in a notebook, learn'd and conn'd by rote,
    To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
    My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
    And here my naked breast; within, a heart
    Dearer than Pluto's mine, richer than gold.
    If that thou best a Roman, take it forth;
    I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
    Strike, as thou didst at Caesar, for I know,
    When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
    Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
  BRUTUS. Sheathe your dagger.  
    Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
    Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
    O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb,
    That carries anger as the flint bears fire,
    Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark
    And straight is cold again.
  CASSIUS. Hath Cassius lived
    To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
    When grief and blood ill-temper'd vexeth him?
  BRUTUS. When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.
  CASSIUS. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
  BRUTUS. And my heart too.
  CASSIUS. O Brutus!
  BRUTUS. What's the matter?
  CASSIUS. Have not you love enough to bear with me
    When that rash humor which my mother gave me
    Makes me forgetful?
  BRUTUS. Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth,
    When you are overearnest with your Brutus,
    He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.  
  POET. [Within.] Let me go in to see the generals.
    There is some grudge between 'em, 'tis not meet
    They be alone.
  LUCILIUS. [Within.] You shall not come to them.
  POET. [Within.] Nothing but death shall stay me.

      Enter Poet, followed by Lucilius, Titinius, and Lucius.

  CASSIUS. How now, what's the matter?
  POET. For shame, you generals! What do you mean?
    Love, and be friends, as two such men should be;
    For I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye.
  CASSIUS. Ha, ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
  BRUTUS. Get you hence, sirrah; saucy fellow, hence!
  CASSIUS. Bear with him, Brutus; 'tis his fashion.
  BRUTUS. I'll know his humor when he knows his time.
    What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
    Companion, hence!
  CASSIUS. Away, away, be gone!                       Exit Poet.
  BRUTUS. Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders  
    Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
  CASSIUS. And come yourselves and bring Messala with you
    Immediately to us.             Exeunt Lucilius and Titinius.
  BRUTUS. Lucius, a bowl of wine!                   Exit Lucius.
  CASSIUS. I did not think you could have been so angry.
  BRUTUS. O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
  CASSIUS. Of your philosophy you make no use,
    If you give place to accidental evils.
  BRUTUS. No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
  CASSIUS. Ha? Portia?
  BRUTUS. She is dead.
  CASSIUS. How 'scaped killing when I cross'd you so?
    O insupportable and touching loss!
    Upon what sickness?
  BRUTUS. Impatient of my absence,
    And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
    Have made themselves so strong- for with her death
    That tidings came- with this she fell distract,
    And (her attendants absent) swallow'd fire.
  CASSIUS. And died so?  
  BRUTUS. Even so.
  CASSIUS. O ye immortal gods!

               Re-enter Lucius, with wine and taper.

  BRUTUS. Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of wine.
    In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.              Drinks.
  CASSIUS. My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
  Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
  I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love.               Drinks.
  BRUTUS. Come in, Titinius!                        Exit Lucius.

                 Re-enter Titinius, with Messala.

    Welcome, good Messala.
    Now sit we close about this taper here,
    And call in question our necessities.
  CASSIUS. Portia, art thou gone?
  BRUTUS. No more, I pray you.
    Messala, I have here received letters  
    That young Octavius and Mark Antony
    Come down upon us with a mighty power,
    Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
  MESSALA. Myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.
  BRUTUS. With what addition?
  MESSALA. That by proscription and bills of outlawry
    Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
    Have put to death an hundred senators.
  BRUTUS. There in our letters do not well agree;
    Mine speak of seventy senators that died
    By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
  CASSIUS. Cicero one!
  MESSALA. Cicero is dead,
    And by that order of proscription.
    Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
  BRUTUS. No, Messala.
  MESSALA. Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
  BRUTUS. Nothing, Messala.
  MESSALA. That, methinks, is strange.
  BRUTUS. Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?  
  MESSALA. No, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.
  MESSALA. Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell:
    For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
  BRUTUS. Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.
    With meditating that she must die once
    I have the patience to endure it now.
  MESSALA. Even so great men great losses should endure.
  CASSIUS. I have as much of this in art as you,
    But yet my nature could not bear it so.
  BRUTUS. Well, to our work alive. What do you think
    Of marching to Philippi presently?
  CASSIUS. I do not think it good.
  BRUTUS. Your reason?
  CASSIUS. This it is:
    'Tis better that the enemy seek us;
    So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
    Doing himself offense, whilst we lying still
    Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
  BRUTUS. Good reasons must of force give place to better.  
    The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground
    Do stand but in a forced affection,
    For they have grudged us contribution.
    The enemy, marching along by them,
    By them shall make a fuller number up,
    Come on refresh'd, new-added, and encouraged;
    From which advantage shall we cut him off
    If at Philippi we do face him there,
    These people at our back.
  CASSIUS. Hear me, good brother.
  BRUTUS. Under your pardon. You must note beside
    That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
    Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe:
    The enemy increaseth every day;
    We, at the height, are ready to decline.
    There is a tide in the affairs of men
    Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune;
    Omitted, all the voyage of their life
    Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
    On such a full sea are we now afloat,  
    And we must take the current when it serves,
    Or lose our ventures.
  CASSIUS. Then, with your will, go on;
    We'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
    And nature must obey necessity,
    Which we will niggard with a little rest.
    There is no more to say?
  CASSIUS. No more. Good night.
    Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
  BRUTUS. Lucius!

                       Re-enter Lucius.

    My gown.                                        Exit Lucius.
    Farewell, good Messala;
    Good night, Titinius; noble, noble Cassius,
    Good night and good repose.
  CASSIUS. O my dear brother!
    This was an ill beginning of the night.  
    Never come such division 'tween our souls!
    Let it not, Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Everything is well.
  CASSIUS. Good night, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Good night, good brother.
  TITINIUS. MESSALA. Good night, Lord Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Farewell, everyone.
                                          Exeunt all but Brutus.

               Re-enter Lucius, with the gown.

    Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?
  LUCIUS. Here in the tent.
  BRUTUS. What, thou speak'st drowsily?
    Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'erwatch'd.
    Call Claudio and some other of my men,
    I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
  LUCIUS. Varro and Claudio!

                   Enter Varro and Claudio.  

  VARRO. Calls my lord?
  BRUTUS. I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep;
    It may be I shall raise you by and by
    On business to my brother Cassius.
  VARRO. So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.
  BRUTUS. I would not have it so. Lie down, good sirs.
    It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
    Look Lucius, here's the book I sought for so;
    I put it in the pocket of my gown.
                                     Varro and Claudio lie down.
  LUCIUS. I was sure your lordship did not give it me.
  BRUTUS. Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
    Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
    And touch thy instrument a strain or two?
  LUCIUS. Ay, my lord, an't please you.
  BRUTUS. It does, my boy.
    I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
  LUCIUS. It is my duty, sir.
  BRUTUS. I should not urge thy duty past thy might;  
    I know young bloods look for a time of rest.
  LUCIUS. I have slept, my lord, already.
  BRUTUS. It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again;
    I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
    I will be good to thee.                   Music, and a song.
    This is a sleepy tune. O murtherous slumber,
    Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy
    That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night.
    I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
    If thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument;
    I'll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.
    Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turn'd down
    Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.        Sits down.

                 Enter the Ghost of Caesar.

    How ill this taper burns! Ha, who comes here?
    I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
    That shapes this monstrous apparition.
    It comes upon me. Art thou anything?  
    Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil
    That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare?
    Speak to me what thou art.
  GHOST. Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Why comest thou?
  GHOST. To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. Well, then I shall see thee again?
  GHOST. Ay, at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.     Exit Ghost.
    Now I have taken heart thou vanishest.
    Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
    Boy! Lucius! Varro! Claudio! Sirs, awake!
    Claudio!
  LUCIUS. The strings, my lord, are false.
  BRUTUS. He thinks he still is at his instrument.
    Lucius, awake!
  LUCIUS. My lord?
  BRUTUS. Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
  LUCIUS. My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
  BRUTUS. Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see anything?  
  LUCIUS. Nothing, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudio!
    [To Varro.] Fellow thou, awake!
  VARRO. My lord?
  CLAUDIO. My lord?
  BRUTUS. Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
  VARRO. CLAUDIO. Did we, my lord?
  BRUTUS. Ay, saw you anything?
  VARRO. No, my lord, I saw nothing.
  CLAUDIO. Nor I, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Go and commend me to my brother Cassius;
    Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
    And we will follow.
  VARRO. CLAUDIO. It shall be done, my lord.             Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
The plains of Philippi.

Enter Octavius, Antony, and their Army.

  OCTAVIUS. Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.
    You said the enemy would not come down,
    But keep the hills and upper regions.
    It proves not so. Their battles are at hand;
    They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
    Answering before we do demand of them.
  ANTONY. Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
    Wherefore they do it. They could be content
    To visit other places, and come down
    With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
    To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
    But 'tis not so.

                    Enter a Messenger.

  MESSENGER. Prepare you, generals.
    The enemy comes on in gallant show;  
    Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
    And something to be done immediately.
  ANTONY. Octavius, lead your battle softly on,
    Upon the left hand of the even field.
  OCTAVIUS. Upon the right hand I, keep thou the left.
  ANTONY. Why do you cross me in this exigent?
  OCTAVIUS. I do not cross you, but I will do so.

      March. Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius, and their Army;
           Lucilius, Titinius, Messala, and others.

  BRUTUS. They stand, and would have parley.
  CASSIUS. Stand fast, Titinius; we must out and talk.
  OCTAVIUS. Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?
  ANTONY. No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
    Make forth, the generals would have some words.
  OCTAVIUS. Stir not until the signal not until the signal.
  BRUTUS. Words before blows. Is it so, countrymen?
  OCTAVIUS. Not that we love words better, as you do.
  BRUTUS. Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.  
  ANTONY. In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.
    Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,
    Crying "Long live! Hail, Caesar!"
  CASSIUS. Antony,
    The posture of your blows are yet unknown;
    But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
    And leave them honeyless.
  ANTONY. Not stingless too.
  BRUTUS. O, yes, and soundless too,
    For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,
    And very wisely threat before you sting.
  ANTONY. Villains! You did not so when your vile daggers
    Hack'd one another in the sides of Caesar.
    You show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
    And bow'd like bondmen, kissing Caesar's feet;
    Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
    Strooke Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
  CASSIUS. Flatterers? Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
    This tongue had not offended so today,
    If Cassius might have ruled.  
  OCTAVIUS. Come, come, the cause. If arguing make us sweat,
    The proof of it will turn to redder drops.
    Look,
    I draw a sword against conspirators;
    When think you that the sword goes up again?
    Never, till Caesar's three and thirty wounds
    Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
    Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
  BRUTUS. Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,
    Unless thou bring'st them with thee.
  OCTAVIUS. So I hope,
    I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.
  BRUTUS. O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
    Young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
  CASSIUS. A peevish school boy, worthless of such honor,
    Join'd with a masker and a reveler!
  ANTONY. Old Cassius still!
  OCTAVIUS. Come, Antony, away!
    Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
    If you dare fight today, come to the field;  
    If not, when you have stomachs.
                        Exeunt Octavius, Antony, and their Army.
  CASSIUS. Why, now, blow and, swell billow, and swim bark!
    The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
  BRUTUS. Ho, Lucilius! Hark, a word with you.
  LUCILIUS. [Stands forth.] My lord?
                             Brutus and Lucilius converse apart.
  CASSIUS. Messala!
  MESSALA. [Stands forth.] What says my general?
  CASSIUS. Messala,
    This is my birthday, as this very day
    Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala.
    Be thou my witness that, against my will,
    As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set
    Upon one battle all our liberties.
    You know that I held Epicurus strong,
    And his opinion. Now I change my mind,
    And partly credit things that do presage.
    Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
    Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,  
    Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,
    Who to Philippi here consorted us.
    This morning are they fled away and gone,
    And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
    Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,
    As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem
    A canopy most fatal, under which
    Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
  MESSALA. Believe not so.
  CASSIUS. I but believe it partly,
    For I am fresh of spirit and resolved
    To meet all perils very constantly.
  BRUTUS. Even so, Lucilius.
  CASSIUS. Now, most noble Brutus,
    The gods today stand friendly that we may,
    Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
    But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
    Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
    If we do lose this battle, then is this
    The very last time we shall speak together.  
    What are you then determined to do?
  BRUTUS. Even by the rule of that philosophy
    By which I did blame Cato for the death
    Which he did give himself- I know not how,
    But I do find it cowardly and vile,
    For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
    The time of life- arming myself with patience
    To stay the providence of some high powers
    That govern us below.
  CASSIUS. Then, if we lose this battle,
    You are contented to be led in triumph
    Thorough the streets of Rome?
  BRUTUS. No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble Roman,
    That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
    He bears too great a mind. But this same day
    Must end that work the ides of March begun.
    And whether we shall meet again I know not.
    Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
    Forever, and forever, farewell, Cassius!
    If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;  
    If not, why then this parting was well made.
  CASSIUS. Forever and forever farewell, Brutus!
    If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
    If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
  BRUTUS. Why then, lead on. O, that a man might know
    The end of this day's business ere it come!
    But it sufficeth that the day will end,
    And then the end is known. Come, ho! Away!           Exeunt.




SCENE II.
The field of battle.

Alarum. Enter Brutus and Messala.

  BRUTUS. Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
    Unto the legions on the other side.             Loud alarum.
    Let them set on at once, for I perceive
    But cold demeanor in Octavia's wing,
    And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
    Ride, ride, Messala. Let them all come down.         Exeunt.




SCENE III.
Another part of the field.

Alarums. Enter Cassius and Titinius.

  CASSIUS. O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
    Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy.
    This ensign here of mine was turning back;
    I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
  TITINIUS. O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
    Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
    Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil,
    Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.

                       Enter Pindarus.

  PINDARUS. Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
    Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord;
    Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
  CASSIUS. This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius:
    Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
  TITINIUS. They are, my lord.  
  CASSIUS. Titinius, if thou lovest me,
    Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,
    Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
    And here again, that I may rest assured
    Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
  TITINIUS. I will be here again, even with a thought.     Exit.
  CASSIUS. Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill;
    My sight was ever thick; regard Titinius,
    And tell me what thou notest about the field.
                                      Pindarus ascends the hill.
    This day I breathed first: time is come round,
    And where I did begin, there shall I end;
    My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?
  PINDARUS. [Above.] O my lord!
  CASSIUS. What news?
  PINDARUS. [Above.] Titinius is enclosed round about
    With horsemen, that make to him on the spur;
    Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
    Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.
    He's ta'en [Shout.] And, hark! They shout for joy.  
  CASSIUS. Come down; behold no more.
    O, coward that I am, to live so long,
    To see my best friend ta'en before my face!
                                              Pindarus descends.
    Come hither, sirrah.
    In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
    And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
    That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
    Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath;
    Now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
    That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom.
    Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;
    And when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
    Guide thou the sword. [Pindarus stabs him.] Caesar, thou art
      revenged,
    Even with the sword that kill'd thee.                  Dies.
  PINDARUS. So, I am free, yet would not so have been,
    Durst I have done my will. O Cassius!
    Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
    Where never Roman shall take note of him.              Exit.  

                Re-enter Titinius with Messala.

  MESSALA. It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius
    Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,
    As Cassius' legions are by Antony.
  TITINIUS. These tidings would well comfort Cassius.
  MESSALA. Where did you leave him?
  TITINIUS. All disconsolate,
    With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
  MESSALA. Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
  TITINIUS. He lies not like the living. O my heart!
  MESSALA. Is not that he?
  TITINIUS. No, this was he, Messala,
    But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
    As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
    So in his red blood Cassius' day is set,
    The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone;
    Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done!
    Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.  
  MESSALA. Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
    O hateful error, melancholy's child,
    Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
    The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,
    Thou never comest unto a happy birth,
    But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!
  TITINIUS. What, Pindarus! Where art thou, Pindarus?
  MESSALA. Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
    The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
    Into his ears. I may say "thrusting" it,
    For piercing steel and darts envenomed
    Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
    As tidings of this sight.
  TITINIUS. Hie you, Messala,
    And I will seek for Pindarus the while.        Exit Messala.
    Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
    Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they
    Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
    And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
    Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything!  
    But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
    Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
    Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
    And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
    By your leave, gods, this is a Roman's part.
    Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart.
                                                  Kills himself.

       Alarum. Re-enter Messala, with Brutus, young Cato,
                         and others.

  BRUTUS. Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
  MESSALA. Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
  BRUTUS. Titinius' face is upward.
  CATO. He is slain.
  BRUTUS. O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
    Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords
    In our own proper entrails.                     Low alarums.
  CATO. Brave Titinius!
    Look whe'er he have not crown'd dead Cassius!  
  BRUTUS. Are yet two Romans living such as these?
    The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
    It is impossible that ever Rome
    Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe moe tears
    To this dead man than you shall see me pay.
    I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
    Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body;
    His funerals shall not be in our camp,
    Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come,
    And come, young Cato; let us to the field.
    Labio and Flavio, set our battles on.
    'Tis three o'clock, and Romans, yet ere night
    We shall try fortune in a second fight.              Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
Another part of the field.

Alarum. Enter, fighting, Soldiers of both armies; then Brutus, young Cato,
Lucilius, and others.

  BRUTUS. Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
  CATO. What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
    I will proclaim my name about the field.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
    A foe to tyrants, and my country's friend.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
  BRUTUS. And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I;
    Brutus, my country's friend; know me for Brutus!       Exit.
  LUCILIUS. O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
    Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
    And mayst be honor'd, being Cato's son.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Yield, or thou diest.
  LUCILIUS. Only I yield to die.
    [Offers money.] There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight:
    Kill Brutus, and be honor'd in his death.
  FIRST SOLDIER. We must not. A noble prisoner!  
  SECOND SOLDIER. Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.
  FIRST SOLDIER. I'll tell the news. Here comes the general.

                         Enter Antony.

    Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.
  ANTONY. Where is he?
  LUCILIUS. Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough.
    I dare assure thee that no enemy
    Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus;
    The gods defend him from so great a shame!
    When you do find him, or alive or dead,
    He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
  ANTONY. This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you,
    A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe,
    Give him all kindness; I had rather have
    Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
    And see wheer Brutus be alive or dead,
    And bring us word unto Octavius' tent
    How everything is chanced.                           Exeunt.




SCENE V.
Another part of the field.

Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato, and Volumnius.

  BRUTUS. Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
  CLITUS. Statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord,
    He came not back. He is or ta'en or slain.
  BRUTUS. Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word:
    It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.        Whispers.
  CLITUS. What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
  BRUTUS. Peace then, no words.
  CLITUS. I'll rather kill myself.
  BRUTUS. Hark thee, Dardanius.                        Whispers.
  DARDANIUS. Shall I do such a deed?
  CLITUS. O Dardanius!
  DARDANIUS. O Clitus!
  CLITUS. What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
  DARDANIUS. To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
  CLITUS. Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
    That it runs over even at his eyes.
  BRUTUS. Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word.  
  VOLUMNIUS. What says my lord?
  BRUTUS. Why, this, Volumnius:
    The ghost of Caesar hath appear'd to me
    Two several times by night; at Sardis once,
    And this last night here in Philippi fields.
    I know my hour is come.
  VOLUMNIUS. Not so, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Nay I am sure it is, Volumnius.
    Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
    Our enemies have beat us to the pit;            Low alarums.
    It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
    Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
    Thou know'st that we two went to school together;
    Even for that our love of old, I prithee,
    Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.
  VOLUMNIUS. That's not an office for a friend, my lord.
                                                   Alarum still.
  CLITUS. Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.
  BRUTUS. Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius.
    Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;  
    Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,
    My heart doth joy that yet in all my life
    I found no man but he was true to me.
    I shall have glory by this losing day,
    More than Octavius and Mark Antony
    By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
    So, fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue
    Hath almost ended his life's history.
    Night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest
    That have but labor'd to attain this hour.
                            Alarum. Cry within, "Fly, fly, fly!"
  CLITUS. Fly, my lord, fly.
  BRUTUS. Hence! I will follow.
                        Exeunt Clitus, Dardanius, and Volumnius.
    I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
    Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
    Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
    Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
    While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?
  STRATO. Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.  
  BRUTUS. Farewell, good Strato.              Runs on his sword.
    Caesar, now be still;
    I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.            Dies.

     Alarum. Retreat. Enter Octavius, Antony, Messala,
                 Lucilius, and the Army.

  OCTAVIUS. What man is that?
  MESSALA. My master's man. Strato, where is thy master?
  STRATO. Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:
    The conquerors can but make a fire of him;
    For Brutus only overcame himself,
    And no man else hath honor by his death.
  LUCILIUS. So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,
    That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.
  OCTAVIUS. All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.
    Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
  STRATO. Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
  OCTAVIUS. Do so, good Messala.
  MESSALA. How died my master, Strato?  
  STRATO. I held the sword, and he did run on it.
  MESSALA. Octavius, then take him to follow thee
    That did the latest service to my master.
  ANTONY. This was the noblest Roman of them all.
    All the conspirators, save only he,
    Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
    He only, in a general honest thought
    And common good to all, made one of them.
    His life was gentle, and the elements
    So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up
    And say to all the world, "This was a man!"
  OCTAVIUS. According to his virtue let us use him
    With all respect and rites of burial.
    Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
    Most like a soldier, ordered honorably.
    So call the field to rest, and let's away,
    To part the glories of this happy day.              Exeunt.


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>






1606


THE TRAGEDY OF KING LEAR

by William Shakespeare




Dramatis Personae

      Lear, King of Britain.
      King of France.
      Duke of Burgundy.
      Duke of Cornwall.
      Duke of Albany.
      Earl of Kent.
      Earl of Gloucester.
      Edgar, son of Gloucester.
      Edmund, bastard son to Gloucester.
      Curan, a courtier.
      Old Man, tenant to Gloucester.
      Doctor.
      Lear's Fool.
      Oswald, steward to Goneril.
      A Captain under Edmund's command.
      Gentlemen.
      A Herald.
      Servants to Cornwall.

      Goneril, daughter to Lear.
      Regan, daughter to Lear.
      Cordelia, daughter to Lear.

      Knights attending on Lear, Officers, Messengers, Soldiers,
        Attendants.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



Scene: - Britain.


ACT I. Scene I.
[King Lear's Palace.]

Enter Kent, Gloucester, and Edmund. [Kent and Glouceste converse.
Edmund stands back.]

  Kent. I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than
     Cornwall.
  Glou. It did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
  Kent. Is not this your son, my lord?
  Glou. His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. I have so often
     blush'd to acknowledge him that now I am braz'd to't.
  Kent. I cannot conceive you.
  Glou. Sir, this young fellow's mother could; whereupon she grew
     round-womb'd, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she
     had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?
  Kent. I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so
     proper.
  Glou. But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year elder than
     this, who yet is no dearer in my account. Though this knave came
     something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet was  
     his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the
     whoreson must be acknowledged.- Do you know this noble gentleman,
     Edmund?
  Edm. [comes forward] No, my lord.
  Glou. My Lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.
  Edm. My services to your lordship.
  Kent. I must love you, and sue to know you better.
  Edm. Sir, I shall study deserving.
  Glou. He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
                                                 Sound a sennet.
     The King is coming.

      Enter one bearing a coronet; then Lear; then the Dukes of
      Albany and Cornwall; next, Goneril, Regan, Cordelia, with
                              Followers.

  Lear. Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
  Glou. I shall, my liege.
                                 Exeunt [Gloucester and Edmund].
  Lear. Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
     Give me the map there. Know we have divided  
     In three our kingdom; and 'tis our fast intent
     To shake all cares and business from our age,
     Conferring them on younger strengths while we
     Unburthen'd crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
     And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
     We have this hour a constant will to publish
     Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
     May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,
     Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
     Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
     And here are to be answer'd. Tell me, my daughters
     (Since now we will divest us both of rule,
     Interest of territory, cares of state),
     Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
     That we our largest bounty may extend
     Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,
     Our eldest-born, speak first.
  Gon. Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
     Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;
     Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;  
     No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
     As much as child e'er lov'd, or father found;
     A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.
     Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
  Cor. [aside] What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
  Lear. Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
     With shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,
     With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
     We make thee lady. To thine and Albany's issue
     Be this perpetual.- What says our second daughter,
     Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.
  Reg. Sir, I am made
     Of the selfsame metal that my sister is,
     And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
     I find she names my very deed of love;
     Only she comes too short, that I profess
     Myself an enemy to all other joys
     Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
     And find I am alone felicitate
     In your dear Highness' love.  
  Cor. [aside] Then poor Cordelia!
     And yet not so; since I am sure my love's
     More richer than my tongue.
  Lear. To thee and thine hereditary ever
     Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
     No less in space, validity, and pleasure
     Than that conferr'd on Goneril.- Now, our joy,
     Although the last, not least; to whose young love
     The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
     Strive to be interest; what can you say to draw
     A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.
  Cor. Nothing, my lord.
  Lear. Nothing?
  Cor. Nothing.
  Lear. Nothing can come of nothing. Speak again.
  Cor. Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
     My heart into my mouth. I love your Majesty
     According to my bond; no more nor less.
  Lear. How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
     Lest it may mar your fortunes.  
  Cor. Good my lord,
     You have begot me, bred me, lov'd me; I
     Return those duties back as are right fit,
     Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
     Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
     They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
     That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
     Half my love with him, half my care and duty.
     Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
     To love my father all.
  Lear. But goes thy heart with this?
  Cor. Ay, good my lord.
  Lear. So young, and so untender?
  Cor. So young, my lord, and true.
  Lear. Let it be so! thy truth then be thy dower!
     For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
     The mysteries of Hecate and the night;
     By all the operation of the orbs
     From whom we do exist and cease to be;
     Here I disclaim all my paternal care,  
     Propinquity and property of blood,
     And as a stranger to my heart and me
     Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
     Or he that makes his generation messes
     To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
     Be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and reliev'd,
     As thou my sometime daughter.
  Kent. Good my liege-
  Lear. Peace, Kent!
     Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
     I lov'd her most, and thought to set my rest
     On her kind nursery.- Hence and avoid my sight!-
     So be my grave my peace as here I give
     Her father's heart from her! Call France! Who stirs?
     Call Burgundy! Cornwall and Albany,
     With my two daughters' dowers digest this third;
     Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
     I do invest you jointly in my power,
     Preeminence, and all the large effects
     That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,  
     With reservation of an hundred knights,
     By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
     Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain
     The name, and all th' additions to a king. The sway,
     Revenue, execution of the rest,
     Beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm,
     This coronet part betwixt you.
  Kent. Royal Lear,
     Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,
     Lov'd as my father, as my master follow'd,
     As my great patron thought on in my prayers-
  Lear. The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.
  Kent. Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
     The region of my heart! Be Kent unmannerly
     When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
     Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
     When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound
     When majesty falls to folly. Reverse thy doom;
     And in thy best consideration check
     This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment,  
     Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
     Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
     Reverbs no hollowness.
  Lear. Kent, on thy life, no more!
  Kent. My life I never held but as a pawn
     To wage against thine enemies; nor fear to lose it,
     Thy safety being the motive.
  Lear. Out of my sight!
  Kent. See better, Lear, and let me still remain
     The true blank of thine eye.
  Lear. Now by Apollo-
  Kent. Now by Apollo, King,
     Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
  Lear. O vassal! miscreant!
                                   [Lays his hand on his sword.]
  Alb., Corn. Dear sir, forbear!
  Kent. Do!
     Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
     Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
     Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,  
     I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
  Lear. Hear me, recreant!
     On thine allegiance, hear me!
     Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow-
     Which we durst never yet- and with strain'd pride
     To come between our sentence and our power,-
     Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,-
     Our potency made good, take thy reward.
     Five days we do allot thee for provision
     To shield thee from diseases of the world,
     And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
     Upon our kingdom. If, on the tenth day following,
     Thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
     The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,
     This shall not be revok'd.
  Kent. Fare thee well, King. Since thus thou wilt appear,
     Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
     [To Cordelia] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
     That justly think'st and hast most rightly said!
     [To Regan and Goneril] And your large speeches may your deeds  
        approve,
     That good effects may spring from words of love.
     Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
     He'll shape his old course in a country new.
Exit.

  Flourish. Enter Gloucester, with France and Burgundy; Attendants.

  Glou. Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
  Lear. My Lord of Burgundy,
     We first address toward you, who with this king
     Hath rivall'd for our daughter. What in the least
     Will you require in present dower with her,
     Or cease your quest of love?
  Bur. Most royal Majesty,
     I crave no more than hath your Highness offer'd,
     Nor will you tender less.
  Lear. Right noble Burgundy,
     When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
     But now her price is fall'n. Sir, there she stands.
     If aught within that little seeming substance,
     Or all of it, with our displeasure piec'd,  
     And nothing more, may fitly like your Grace,
     She's there, and she is yours.
  Bur. I know no answer.
  Lear. Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
     Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,
     Dow'r'd with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath,
     Take her, or leave her?
  Bur. Pardon me, royal sir.
     Election makes not up on such conditions.
  Lear. Then leave her, sir; for, by the pow'r that made me,
     I tell you all her wealth. [To France] For you, great King,
     I would not from your love make such a stray
     To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
     T' avert your liking a more worthier way
     Than on a wretch whom nature is asham'd
     Almost t' acknowledge hers.
  France. This is most strange,
     That she that even but now was your best object,
     The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
     Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time  
     Commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle
     So many folds of favour. Sure her offence
     Must be of such unnatural degree
     That monsters it, or your fore-vouch'd affection
     Fall'n into taint; which to believe of her
     Must be a faith that reason without miracle
     Should never plant in me.
  Cor. I yet beseech your Majesty,
     If for I want that glib and oily art
     To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend,
     I'll do't before I speak- that you make known
     It is no vicious blot, murther, or foulness,
     No unchaste action or dishonoured step,
     That hath depriv'd me of your grace and favour;
     But even for want of that for which I am richer-
     A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue
     As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
     Hath lost me in your liking.
  Lear. Better thou
     Hadst not been born than not t' have pleas'd me better.  
  France. Is it but this- a tardiness in nature
     Which often leaves the history unspoke
     That it intends to do? My Lord of Burgundy,
     What say you to the lady? Love's not love
     When it is mingled with regards that stands
     Aloof from th' entire point. Will you have her?
     She is herself a dowry.
  Bur. Royal Lear,
     Give but that portion which yourself propos'd,
     And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
     Duchess of Burgundy.
  Lear. Nothing! I have sworn; I am firm.
  Bur. I am sorry then you have so lost a father
     That you must lose a husband.
  Cor. Peace be with Burgundy!
     Since that respects of fortune are his love,
     I shall not be his wife.
  France. Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;
     Most choice, forsaken; and most lov'd, despis'd!
     Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon.  
     Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
     Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
     My love should kindle to inflam'd respect.
     Thy dow'rless daughter, King, thrown to my chance,
     Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France.
     Not all the dukes in wat'rish Burgundy
     Can buy this unpriz'd precious maid of me.
     Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.
     Thou losest here, a better where to find.
  Lear. Thou hast her, France; let her be thine; for we
     Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
     That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
     Without our grace, our love, our benison.
     Come, noble Burgundy.
             Flourish. Exeunt Lear, Burgundy, [Cornwall, Albany,
                                    Gloucester, and Attendants].
  France. Bid farewell to your sisters.
  Cor. The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
     Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are;
     And, like a sister, am most loath to call  
     Your faults as they are nam'd. Use well our father.
     To your professed bosoms I commit him;
     But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
     I would prefer him to a better place!
     So farewell to you both.
  Gon. Prescribe not us our duties.
  Reg. Let your study
     Be to content your lord, who hath receiv'd you
     At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,
     And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
  Cor. Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides.
     Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.
     Well may you prosper!
  France. Come, my fair Cordelia.
                                     Exeunt France and Cordelia.
  Gon. Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most nearly
     appertains to us both. I think our father will hence to-night.
  Reg. That's most certain, and with you; next month with us.
  Gon. You see how full of changes his age is. The observation we
     have made of it hath not been little. He always lov'd our  
     sister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her
     off appears too grossly.
  Reg. 'Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but slenderly
     known himself.
  Gon. The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then
     must we look to receive from his age, not alone the
     imperfections of long-ingraffed condition, but therewithal
     the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with
     them.
  Reg. Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this
     of Kent's banishment.
  Gon. There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and
     him. Pray you let's hit together. If our father carry authority
     with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his
     will but offend us.
  Reg. We shall further think on't.
  Gon. We must do something, and i' th' heat.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
The Earl of Gloucester's Castle.

Enter [Edmund the] Bastard solus, [with a letter].

  Edm. Thou, Nature, art my goddess; to thy law
     My services are bound. Wherefore should I
     Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
     The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
     For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
     Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
     When my dimensions are as well compact,
     My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
     As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
     With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
     Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
     More composition and fierce quality
     Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
     Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
     Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,
     Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.
     Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
     As to th' legitimate. Fine word- 'legitimate'!
     Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,  
     And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
     Shall top th' legitimate. I grow; I prosper.
     Now, gods, stand up for bastards!

                          Enter Gloucester.

  Glou. Kent banish'd thus? and France in choler parted?
     And the King gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r?
     Confin'd to exhibition? All this done
     Upon the gad? Edmund, how now? What news?
  Edm. So please your lordship, none.
                                           [Puts up the letter.]
  Glou. Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
  Edm. I know no news, my lord.
  Glou. What paper were you reading?
  Edm. Nothing, my lord.
  Glou. No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your
     pocket? The quality of nothing hath not such need to hide
     itself. Let's see. Come, if it be nothing, I shall not need
     spectacles.
  Edm. I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother
     that I have not all o'er-read; and for so much as I have  
     perus'd, I find it not fit for your o'erlooking.
  Glou. Give me the letter, sir.
  Edm. I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as
     in part I understand them, are to blame.
  Glou. Let's see, let's see!
  Edm. I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as
     an essay or taste of my virtue.

  Glou. (reads) 'This policy and reverence of age makes the world
     bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
     till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle
     and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways,
     not as it hath power, but as it is suffer'd. Come to me, that
     of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I
     wak'd him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and live
     the beloved of your brother,
                                                        'EDGAR.'

     Hum! Conspiracy? 'Sleep till I wak'd him, you should enjoy half
     his revenue.' My son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this? a heart
     and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?
  Edm. It was not brought me, my lord: there's the cunning of it. I  
     found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
  Glou. You know the character to be your brother's?
  Edm. If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his;
     but in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.
  Glou. It is his.
  Edm. It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is not in the
     contents.
  Glou. Hath he never before sounded you in this business?
  Edm. Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit
     that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declining, the father
     should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
  Glou. O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred
     villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than
     brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him. I'll apprehend him. Abominable
     villain! Where is he?
  Edm. I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend
     your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him
     better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course;
     where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his
     purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake  
     in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
     for him that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your
     honour, and to no other pretence of danger.
  Glou. Think you so?
  Edm. If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall
     hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have your
     satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very
     evening.
  Glou. He cannot be such a monster.
  Edm. Nor is not, sure.
  Glou. To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him.
     Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out; wind me into him, I pray
     you; frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate
     myself to be in a due resolution.
  Edm. I will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as I
     shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
  Glou. These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to
     us. Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet
     nature finds itself scourg'd by the sequent effects. Love cools,
     friendship falls off, brothers divide. In cities, mutinies; in  
     countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond crack'd
     'twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the
     prediction; there's son against father: the King falls from bias
     of nature; there's father against child. We have seen the best
     of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
     ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out
     this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
     carefully. And the noble and true-hearted Kent banish'd! his
     offence, honesty! 'Tis strange.                       Exit.
  Edm. This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are
     sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we make
     guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as if
     we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
     knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical pre-dominance;
     drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforc'd obedience of
     planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine
     thrusting on. An admirable evasion of whore-master man, to lay
     his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! My father
     compounded with my mother under the Dragon's Tail, and my
     nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and  
     lecherous. Fut! I should have been that I am, had the
     maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.
     Edgar-

                             Enter Edgar.

     and pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy. My
     cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o' Bedlam.
     O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.
  Edg. How now, brother Edmund? What serious contemplation are you
     in?
  Edm. I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day,
     what should follow these eclipses.
  Edg. Do you busy yourself with that?
  Edm. I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily: as
     of unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death,
     dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state,
     menaces and maledictions against king and nobles; needless
     diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts,
     nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
  Edg. How long have you been a sectary astronomical?
  Edm. Come, come! When saw you my father last?  
  Edg. The night gone by.
  Edm. Spake you with him?
  Edg. Ay, two hours together.
  Edm. Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by
     word or countenance
  Edg. None at all.
  Edm. Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him; and at my
     entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath
     qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so
     rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would
     scarcely allay.
  Edg. Some villain hath done me wrong.
  Edm. That's my fear. I pray you have a continent forbearance till
     the speed of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me
     to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my
     lord speak. Pray ye, go! There's my key. If you do stir abroad,
     go arm'd.
  Edg. Arm'd, brother?
  Edm. Brother, I advise you to the best. Go arm'd. I am no honest man
     if there be any good meaning toward you. I have told you what I  
     have seen and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image and
     horror of it. Pray you, away!
  Edg. Shall I hear from you anon?
  Edm. I do serve you in this business.
                                                     Exit Edgar.
     A credulous father! and a brother noble,
     Whose nature is so far from doing harms
     That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
     My practices ride easy! I see the business.
     Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit;
     All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.
Exit.




Scene III.
The Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Goneril and [her] Steward [Oswald].

  Gon. Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
  Osw. Ay, madam.
  Gon. By day and night, he wrongs me! Every hour
     He flashes into one gross crime or other
     That sets us all at odds. I'll not endure it.
     His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
     On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
     I will not speak with him. Say I am sick.
     If you come slack of former services,
     You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.
                                                 [Horns within.]
  Osw. He's coming, madam; I hear him.
  Gon. Put on what weary negligence you please,
     You and your fellows. I'd have it come to question.
     If he distaste it, let him to our sister,
     Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
     Not to be overrul'd. Idle old man,  
     That still would manage those authorities
     That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
     Old fools are babes again, and must be us'd
     With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus'd.
     Remember what I have said.
  Osw. Very well, madam.
  Gon. And let his knights have colder looks among you.
     What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.
     I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
     That I may speak. I'll write straight to my sister
     To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene IV.
The Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Kent, [disguised].

  Kent. If but as well I other accents borrow,
     That can my speech defuse, my good intent
     May carry through itself to that full issue
     For which I raz'd my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,
     If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
     So may it come, thy master, whom thou lov'st,
     Shall find thee full of labours.

         Horns within. Enter Lear, [Knights,] and Attendants.

  Lear. Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready. [Exit
     an Attendant.] How now? What art thou?
  Kent. A man, sir.
  Lear. What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?
  Kent. I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly
     that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to
     converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear  
     judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
  Lear. What art thou?
  Kent. A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.
  Lear. If thou be'st as poor for a subject as he's for a king, thou
     art poor enough. What wouldst thou?
  Kent. Service.
  Lear. Who wouldst thou serve?
  Kent. You.
  Lear. Dost thou know me, fellow?
  Kent. No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would
     fain call master.
  Lear. What's that?
  Kent. Authority.
  Lear. What services canst thou do?
  Kent. I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in
     telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which
     ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of me
     is diligence.
  Lear. How old art thou?
  Kent. Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to  
     dote on her for anything. I have years on my back forty-eight.
  Lear. Follow me; thou shalt serve me. If I like thee no worse after
     dinner, I will not part from thee yet. Dinner, ho, dinner!
     Where's my knave? my fool? Go you and call my fool hither.

                                            [Exit an attendant.]

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?
  Osw. So please you-                                      Exit.
  Lear. What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.
     [Exit a Knight.] Where's my fool, ho? I think the world's
     asleep.

                            [Enter Knight]

     How now? Where's that mongrel?
  Knight. He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
  Lear. Why came not the slave back to me when I call'd him?  
  Knight. Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.
  Lear. He would not?
  Knight. My lord, I know not what the matter is; but to my judgment
     your Highness is not entertain'd with that ceremonious affection
     as you were wont. There's a great abatement of kindness appears
     as well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also
     and your daughter.
  Lear. Ha! say'st thou so?
  Knight. I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken; for
     my duty cannot be silent when I think your Highness wrong'd.
  Lear. Thou but rememb'rest me of mine own conception. I have
     perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather
     blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence
     and purpose of unkindness. I will look further into't. But
     where's my fool? I have not seen him this two days.
  Knight. Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the fool
     hath much pined away.
  Lear. No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you and tell my
     daughter I would speak with her. [Exit Knight.] Go you, call
     hither my fool.  
                                            [Exit an Attendant.]

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     O, you, sir, you! Come you hither, sir. Who am I, sir?
  Osw. My lady's father.
  Lear. 'My lady's father'? My lord's knave! You whoreson dog! you
     slave! you cur!
  Osw. I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.
  Lear. Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?
                                                  [Strikes him.]
  Osw. I'll not be strucken, my lord.
  Kent. Nor tripp'd neither, you base football player?
                                            [Trips up his heels.
  Lear. I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv'st me, and I'll love thee.
  Kent. Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences. Away,
     away! If you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry; but
     away! Go to! Have you wisdom? So.
                                               [Pushes him out.]
  Lear. Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee. There's earnest of thy  
     service.                                     [Gives money.]

                             Enter Fool.

  Fool. Let me hire him too. Here's my coxcomb.
                                          [Offers Kent his cap.]
  Lear. How now, my pretty knave? How dost thou?
  Fool. Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
  Kent. Why, fool?
  Fool. Why? For taking one's part that's out of favour. Nay, an thou
     canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly.
     There, take my coxcomb! Why, this fellow hath banish'd two on's
     daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. If
     thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb.- How now,
     nuncle? Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!
  Lear. Why, my boy?
  Fool. If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.
     There's mine! beg another of thy daughters.
  Lear. Take heed, sirrah- the whip.
  Fool. Truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipp'd out, when  
     Lady the brach may stand by th' fire and stink.
  Lear. A pestilent gall to me!
  Fool. Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.
  Lear. Do.
  Fool. Mark it, nuncle.
          Have more than thou showest,
          Speak less than thou knowest,
          Lend less than thou owest,
          Ride more than thou goest,
          Learn more than thou trowest,
          Set less than thou throwest;
          Leave thy drink and thy whore,
          And keep in-a-door,
          And thou shalt have more
          Than two tens to a score.
  Kent. This is nothing, fool.
  Fool. Then 'tis like the breath of an unfeed lawyer- you gave me
     nothing for't. Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?
  Lear. Why, no, boy. Nothing can be made out of nothing.
  Fool. [to Kent] Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land  
     comes to. He will not believe a fool.
  Lear. A bitter fool!
  Fool. Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter
     fool and a sweet fool?
  Lear. No, lad; teach me.
  Fool.   That lord that counsell'd thee
            To give away thy land,
          Come place him here by me-
            Do thou for him stand.
          The sweet and bitter fool
            Will presently appear;
          The one in motley here,
            The other found out there.
  Lear. Dost thou call me fool, boy?
  Fool. All thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast
     born with.
  Kent. This is not altogether fool, my lord.
  Fool. No, faith; lords and great men will not let me. If I had a
     monopoly out, they would have part on't. And ladies too, they
     will not let me have all the fool to myself; they'll be  
     snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I'll give thee two
     crowns.
  Lear. What two crowns shall they be?
  Fool. Why, after I have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the
     meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i'
     th' middle and gav'st away both parts, thou bor'st thine ass on
     thy back o'er the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
     when thou gav'st thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in
     this, let him be whipp'd that first finds it so.

     [Sings]    Fools had ne'er less grace in a year,
                  For wise men are grown foppish;
                They know not how their wits to wear,
                  Their manners are so apish.

  Lear. When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
  Fool. I have us'd it, nuncle, ever since thou mad'st thy daughters
     thy mother; for when thou gav'st them the rod, and put'st down
     thine own breeches,
  
     [Sings]    Then they for sudden joy did weep,
                  And I for sorrow sung,
                That such a king should play bo-peep
                  And go the fools among.

     Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to
     lie. I would fain learn to lie.
  Lear. An you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipp'd.
  Fool. I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. They'll have me
     whipp'd for speaking true; thou'lt have me whipp'd for lying;
     and sometimes I am whipp'd for holding my peace. I had rather be
     any kind o' thing than a fool! And yet I would not be thee,
     nuncle. Thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left nothing
     i' th' middle. Here comes one o' the parings.

                            Enter Goneril.

  Lear. How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on? Methinks you
     are too much o' late i' th' frown.
  Fool. Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for  
     her frowning. Now thou art an O without a figure. I am better
     than thou art now: I am a fool, thou art nothing.
     [To Goneril] Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue. So your face
     bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum!

            He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
            Weary of all, shall want some.-

     [Points at Lear] That's a sheal'd peascod.
  Gon. Not only, sir, this your all-licens'd fool,
     But other of your insolent retinue
     Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
     In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir,
     I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
     To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,
     By what yourself, too, late have spoke and done,
     That you protect this course, and put it on
     By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
     Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
     Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,  
     Might in their working do you that offence
     Which else were shame, that then necessity
     Must call discreet proceeding.
  Fool. For you know, nuncle,

          The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
          That it had it head bit off by it young.

     So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
  Lear. Are you our daughter?
  Gon. Come, sir,
     I would you would make use of that good wisdom
     Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away
     These dispositions that of late transform you
     From what you rightly are.
  Fool. May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse?
     Whoop, Jug, I love thee!
  Lear. Doth any here know me? This is not Lear.
     Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
     Either his notion weakens, his discernings  
     Are lethargied- Ha! waking? 'Tis not so!
     Who is it that can tell me who I am?
  Fool. Lear's shadow.
  Lear. I would learn that; for, by the marks of sovereignty,
     Knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded
     I had daughters.
  Fool. Which they will make an obedient father.
  Lear. Your name, fair gentlewoman?
  Gon. This admiration, sir, is much o' th' savour
     Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
     To understand my purposes aright.
     As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
     Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
     Men so disorder'd, so debosh'd, and bold
     That this our court, infected with their manners,
     Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
     Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
     Than a grac'd palace. The shame itself doth speak
     For instant remedy. Be then desir'd
     By her that else will take the thing she begs  
     A little to disquantity your train,
     And the remainder that shall still depend
     To be such men as may besort your age,
     Which know themselves, and you.
  Lear. Darkness and devils!
     Saddle my horses! Call my train together!
     Degenerate bastard, I'll not trouble thee;
     Yet have I left a daughter.
  Gon. You strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble
     Make servants of their betters.

                            Enter Albany.

  Lear. Woe that too late repents!- O, sir, are you come?
     Is it your will? Speak, sir!- Prepare my horses.
     Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
     More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
     Than the sea-monster!
  Alb. Pray, sir, be patient.
  Lear. [to Goneril] Detested kite, thou liest!  
     My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
     That all particulars of duty know
     And in the most exact regard support
     The worships of their name.- O most small fault,
     How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
     Which, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature
     From the fix'd place; drew from my heart all love
     And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
     Beat at this gate that let thy folly in  [Strikes his head.]
     And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.
  Alb. My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
     Of what hath mov'd you.
  Lear. It may be so, my lord.
     Hear, Nature, hear! dear goddess, hear!
     Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
     To make this creature fruitful.
     Into her womb convey sterility;
     Dry up in her the organs of increase;
     And from her derogate body never spring
     A babe to honour her! If she must teem,  
     Create her child of spleen, that it may live
     And be a thwart disnatur'd torment to her.
     Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
     With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
     Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
     To laughter and contempt, that she may feel
     How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
     To have a thankless child! Away, away!                Exit.
  Alb. Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
  Gon. Never afflict yourself to know the cause;
     But let his disposition have that scope
     That dotage gives it.

                             Enter Lear.

  Lear. What, fifty of my followers at a clap?
     Within a fortnight?
  Alb. What's the matter, sir?
  Lear. I'll tell thee. [To Goneril] Life and death! I am asham'd
     That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;  
     That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
     Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
     Th' untented woundings of a father's curse
     Pierce every sense about thee!- Old fond eyes,
     Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out,
     And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
     To temper clay. Yea, is it come to this?
     Let it be so. Yet have I left a daughter,
     Who I am sure is kind and comfortable.
     When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
     She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
     That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
     I have cast off for ever; thou shalt, I warrant thee.
                            Exeunt [Lear, Kent, and Attendants].
  Gon. Do you mark that, my lord?
  Alb. I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
     To the great love I bear you -
  Gon. Pray you, content.- What, Oswald, ho!
     [To the Fool] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master!
  Fool. Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry! Take the fool with thee.  

          A fox when one has caught her,
          And such a daughter,
          Should sure to the slaughter,
          If my cap would buy a halter.
          So the fool follows after.                       Exit.
  Gon. This man hath had good counsel! A hundred knights?
     'Tis politic and safe to let him keep
     At point a hundred knights; yes, that on every dream,
     Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
     He may enguard his dotage with their pow'rs
     And hold our lives in mercy.- Oswald, I say!
  Alb. Well, you may fear too far.
  Gon. Safer than trust too far.
     Let me still take away the harms I fear,
     Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.
     What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister.
     If she sustain him and his hundred knights,
     When I have show'd th' unfitness-
  
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     How now, Oswald?
     What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
  Osw. Yes, madam.
  Gon. Take you some company, and away to horse!
     Inform her full of my particular fear,
     And thereto add such reasons of your own
     As may compact it more. Get you gone,
     And hasten your return. [Exit Oswald.] No, no, my lord!
     This milky gentleness and course of yours,
     Though I condemn it not, yet, under pardon,
     You are much more at task for want of wisdom
     Than prais'd for harmful mildness.
  Alb. How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell.
     Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
  Gon. Nay then-
  Alb. Well, well; th' event.                            Exeunt.




Scene V.
Court before the Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.

  Lear. Go you before to Gloucester with these letters. Acquaint my
     daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her
     demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I
     shall be there afore you.
  Kent. I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.
Exit.
  Fool. If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in danger of
     kibes?
  Lear. Ay, boy.
  Fool. Then I prithee be merry. Thy wit shall ne'er go slip-shod.
  Lear. Ha, ha, ha!
  Fool. Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly; for though
     she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yet I can tell
     what I can tell.
  Lear. What canst tell, boy?
  Fool. She'll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou
     canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle on's face?  
  Lear. No.
  Fool. Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that what a
     man cannot smell out, 'a may spy into.
  Lear. I did her wrong.
  Fool. Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
  Lear. No.
  Fool. Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.
  Lear. Why?
  Fool. Why, to put's head in; not to give it away to his daughters,
     and leave his horns without a case.
  Lear. I will forget my nature. So kind a father!- Be my horses
     ready?
  Fool. Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the seven stars
     are no moe than seven is a pretty reason.
  Lear. Because they are not eight?
  Fool. Yes indeed. Thou wouldst make a good fool.
  Lear. To tak't again perforce! Monster ingratitude!
  Fool. If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten for being
     old before thy time.
  Lear. How's that?  
  Fool. Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.
  Lear. O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
     Keep me in temper; I would not be mad!

                         [Enter a Gentleman.]

     How now? Are the horses ready?
  Gent. Ready, my lord.
  Lear. Come, boy.
  Fool. She that's a maid now, and laughs at my departure,
     Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. Scene I.
A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester.

Enter [Edmund the] Bastard and Curan, meeting.

  Edm. Save thee, Curan.
  Cur. And you, sir. I have been with your father, and given him
     notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his Duchess will be
     here with him this night.
  Edm. How comes that?
  Cur. Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad- I mean the
     whisper'd ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments?
  Edm. Not I. Pray you, what are they?
  Cur. Have you heard of no likely wars toward 'twixt the two Dukes
     of Cornwall and Albany?
  Edm. Not a word.
  Cur. You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.      Exit.
  Edm. The Duke be here to-night? The better! best!
     This weaves itself perforce into my business.
     My father hath set guard to take my brother;
     And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
     Which I must act. Briefness and fortune, work!  
     Brother, a word! Descend! Brother, I say!

                             Enter Edgar.

     My father watches. O sir, fly this place!
     Intelligence is given where you are hid.
     You have now the good advantage of the night.
     Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
     He's coming hither; now, i' th' night, i' th' haste,
     And Regan with him. Have you nothing said
     Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
     Advise yourself.
  Edg. I am sure on't, not a word.
  Edm. I hear my father coming. Pardon me!
     In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.
     Draw, seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.-
     Yield! Come before my father. Light, ho, here!
     Fly, brother.- Torches, torches!- So farewell.
                                                     Exit Edgar.
     Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion  
     Of my more fierce endeavour. [Stabs his arm.] I have seen
        drunkards
     Do more than this in sport.- Father, father!-
     Stop, stop! No help?

             Enter Gloucester, and Servants with torches.

  Glou. Now, Edmund, where's the villain?
  Edm. Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
     Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
     To stand 's auspicious mistress.
  Glou. But where is he?
  Edm. Look, sir, I bleed.
  Glou. Where is the villain, Edmund?
  Edm. Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could-
  Glou. Pursue him, ho! Go after.        [Exeunt some Servants].
     By no means what?
  Edm. Persuade me to the murther of your lordship;
     But that I told him the revenging gods
     'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;  
     Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
     The child was bound to th' father- sir, in fine,
     Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
     To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
     With his prepared sword he charges home
     My unprovided body, lanch'd mine arm;
     But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits,
     Bold in the quarrel's right, rous'd to th' encounter,
     Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
     Full suddenly he fled.
  Glou. Let him fly far.
     Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
     And found- dispatch. The noble Duke my master,
     My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night.
     By his authority I will proclaim it
     That he which find, him shall deserve our thanks,
     Bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake;
     He that conceals him, death.
  Edm. When I dissuaded him from his intent
     And found him pight to do it, with curst speech  
     I threaten'd to discover him. He replied,
     'Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think,
     If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
     Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
     Make thy words faith'd? No. What I should deny
     (As this I would; ay, though thou didst produce
     My very character), I'ld turn it all
     To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice;
     And thou must make a dullard of the world,
     If they not thought the profits of my death
     Were very pregnant and potential spurs
     To make thee seek it.'
  Glou. Strong and fast'ned villain!
     Would he deny his letter? I never got him.
                                                  Tucket within.
     Hark, the Duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.
     All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not scape;
     The Duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture
     I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
     May have due note of him, and of my land,  
     Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
     To make thee capable.

                Enter Cornwall, Regan, and Attendants.

  Corn. How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither
     (Which I can call but now) I have heard strange news.
  Reg. If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
     Which can pursue th' offender. How dost, my lord?
  Glou. O madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!
  Reg. What, did my father's godson seek your life?
     He whom my father nam'd? Your Edgar?
  Glou. O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
  Reg. Was he not companion with the riotous knights
     That tend upon my father?
  Glou. I know not, madam. 'Tis too bad, too bad!
  Edm. Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
  Reg. No marvel then though he were ill affected.
     'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
     To have th' expense and waste of his revenues.  
     I have this present evening from my sister
     Been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions
     That, if they come to sojourn at my house,
     I'll not be there.
  Corn. Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
     Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
     A childlike office.
  Edm. 'Twas my duty, sir.
  Glou. He did bewray his practice, and receiv'd
     This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
  Corn. Is he pursued?
  Glou. Ay, my good lord.
  Corn. If he be taken, he shall never more
     Be fear'd of doing harm. Make your own purpose,
     How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
     Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
     So much commend itself, you shall be ours.
     Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
     You we first seize on.
  Edm. I shall serve you, sir,  
     Truly, however else.
  Glou. For him I thank your Grace.
  Corn. You know not why we came to visit you-
  Reg. Thus out of season, threading dark-ey'd night.
     Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
     Wherein we must have use of your advice.
     Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
     Of differences, which I best thought it fit
     To answer from our home. The several messengers
     From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
     Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
     Your needful counsel to our business,
     Which craves the instant use.
  Glou. I serve you, madam.
     Your Graces are right welcome.
                                               Exeunt. Flourish.




Scene II.
Before Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Kent and [Oswald the] Steward, severally.

  Osw. Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house?
  Kent. Ay.
  Osw. Where may we set our horses?
  Kent. I' th' mire.
  Osw. Prithee, if thou lov'st me, tell me.
  Kent. I love thee not.
  Osw. Why then, I care not for thee.
  Kent. If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for
     me.
  Osw. Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
  Kent. Fellow, I know thee.
  Osw. What dost thou know me for?
  Kent. A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,
     shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,
     worsted-stocking knave; a lily-liver'd, action-taking, whoreson,
     glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical rogue;
     one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of
     good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave,  
     beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch;
     one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny the
     least syllable of thy addition.
  Osw. Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one
     that's neither known of thee nor knows thee!
  Kent. What a brazen-fac'd varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me!
     Is it two days ago since I beat thee and tripp'd up thy heels
     before the King? [Draws his sword.] Draw, you rogue! for, though
     it be night, yet the moon shines. I'll make a sop o' th'
     moonshine o' you. Draw, you whoreson cullionly barbermonger!
     draw!
  Osw. Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
  Kent. Draw, you rascal! You come with letters against the King, and
     take Vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father.
     Draw, you rogue, or I'll so carbonado your shanks! Draw, you
     rascal! Come your ways!
  Osw. Help, ho! murther! help!
  Kent. Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat slave!
     Strike!                                        [Beats him.]  
  Osw. Help, ho! murther! murther!

      Enter Edmund, with his rapier drawn, Gloucester, Cornwall,
                           Regan, Servants.

  Edm. How now? What's the matter?                 Parts [them].
  Kent. With you, goodman boy, an you please! Come, I'll flesh ye!
     Come on, young master!
  Glou. Weapons? arms? What's the matter here?
  Corn. Keep peace, upon your lives!
     He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
  Reg. The messengers from our sister and the King
  Corn. What is your difference? Speak.
  Osw. I am scarce in breath, my lord.
  Kent. No marvel, you have so bestirr'd your valour. You cowardly
     rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.
  Corn. Thou art a strange fellow. A tailor make a man?
  Kent. Ay, a tailor, sir. A stonecutter or a painter could not have
     made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.
  Corn. Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?  
  Osw. This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spar'd
     At suit of his grey beard-
  Kent. Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My lord, if
     you'll give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into
     mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him. 'Spare my grey
     beard,' you wagtail?
  Corn. Peace, sirrah!
     You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
  Kent. Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
  Corn. Why art thou angry?
  Kent. That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
     Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
     Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
     Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
     That in the natures of their lords rebel,
     Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
     Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
     With every gale and vary of their masters,
     Knowing naught (like dogs) but following.
     A plague upon your epileptic visage!  
     Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
     Goose, an I had you upon Sarum Plain,
     I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
  Corn. What, art thou mad, old fellow?
  Glou. How fell you out? Say that.
  Kent. No contraries hold more antipathy
     Than I and such a knave.
  Corn. Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?
  Kent. His countenance likes me not.
  Corn. No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.
  Kent. Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain.
     I have seen better faces in my time
     Than stands on any shoulder that I see
     Before me at this instant.
  Corn. This is some fellow
     Who, having been prais'd for bluntness, doth affect
     A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
     Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he!
     An honest mind and plain- he must speak truth!
     An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.  
     These kind of knaves I know which in this plainness
     Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
     Than twenty silly-ducking observants
     That stretch their duties nicely.
  Kent. Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
     Under th' allowance of your great aspect,
     Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
     On flickering Phoebus' front-
  Corn. What mean'st by this?
  Kent. To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I
     know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that beguil'd you in a plain
     accent was a plain knave, which, for my part, I will not be,
     though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to't.
  Corn. What was th' offence you gave him?
  Osw. I never gave him any.
     It pleas'd the King his master very late
     To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
     When he, conjunct, and flattering his displeasure,
     Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd
     And put upon him such a deal of man  
     That worthied him, got praises of the King
     For him attempting who was self-subdu'd;
     And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
     Drew on me here again.
  Kent. None of these rogues and cowards
     But Ajax is their fool.
  Corn. Fetch forth the stocks!
     You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
     We'll teach you-
  Kent. Sir, I am too old to learn.
     Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King;
     On whose employment I was sent to you.
     You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
     Against the grace and person of my master,
     Stocking his messenger.
  Corn. Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
     There shall he sit till noon.
  Reg. Till noon? Till night, my lord, and all night too!
  Kent. Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
     You should not use me so.  
  Reg. Sir, being his knave, I will.
  Corn. This is a fellow of the selfsame colour
     Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
                                             Stocks brought out.
  Glou. Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.
     His fault is much, and the good King his master
     Will check him for't. Your purpos'd low correction
     Is such as basest and contemn'dest wretches
     For pilf'rings and most common trespasses
     Are punish'd with. The King must take it ill
     That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
     Should have him thus restrain'd.
  Corn. I'll answer that.
  Reg. My sister may receive it much more worse,
     To have her gentleman abus'd, assaulted,
     For following her affairs. Put in his legs.-
                                    [Kent is put in the stocks.]
     Come, my good lord, away.
                           Exeunt [all but Gloucester and Kent].
  Glou. I am sorry for thee, friend. 'Tis the Duke's pleasure,  
     Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
     Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd. I'll entreat for thee.
  Kent. Pray do not, sir. I have watch'd and travell'd hard.
     Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
     A good man's fortune may grow out at heels.
     Give you good morrow!
  Glou. The Duke 's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.
Exit.
  Kent. Good King, that must approve the common saw,
     Thou out of heaven's benediction com'st
     To the warm sun!
     Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
     That by thy comfortable beams I may
     Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
     But misery. I know 'tis from Cordelia,
     Who hath most fortunately been inform'd
     Of my obscured course- and [reads] 'shall find time
     From this enormous state, seeking to give
     Losses their remedies'- All weary and o'erwatch'd,
     Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold  
     This shameful lodging.
     Fortune, good night; smile once more, turn thy wheel.
                                                         Sleeps.




Scene III.
The open country.

Enter Edgar.

  Edg. I heard myself proclaim'd,
     And by the happy hollow of a tree
     Escap'd the hunt. No port is free, no place
     That guard and most unusual vigilance
     Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may scape,
     I will preserve myself; and am bethought
     To take the basest and most poorest shape
     That ever penury, in contempt of man,
     Brought near to beast. My face I'll grime with filth,
     Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots,
     And with presented nakedness outface
     The winds and persecutions of the sky.
     The country gives me proof and precedent
     Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
     Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
     Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
     And with this horrible object, from low farms,  
     Poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills,
     Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
     Enforce their charity. 'Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!'
     That's something yet! Edgar I nothing am.             Exit.




Scene IV.
Before Gloucester's Castle; Kent in the stocks.

Enter Lear, Fool, and Gentleman.

  Lear. 'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
     And not send back my messenger.
  Gent. As I learn'd,
     The night before there was no purpose in them
     Of this remove.
  Kent. Hail to thee, noble master!
  Lear. Ha!
     Mak'st thou this shame thy pastime?
  Kent. No, my lord.
  Fool. Ha, ha! look! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by the
     head, dogs and bears by th' neck, monkeys by th' loins, and men
     by th' legs. When a man's over-lusty at legs, then he wears
     wooden nether-stocks.
  Lear. What's he that hath so much thy place mistook
     To set thee here?
  Kent. It is both he and she-
     Your son and daughter.  
  Lear. No.
  Kent. Yes.
  Lear. No, I say.
  Kent. I say yea.
  Lear. No, no, they would not!
  Kent. Yes, they have.
  Lear. By Jupiter, I swear no!
  Kent. By Juno, I swear ay!
  Lear. They durst not do't;
     They would not, could not do't. 'Tis worse than murther
     To do upon respect such violent outrage.
     Resolve me with all modest haste which way
     Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
     Coming from us.
  Kent. My lord, when at their home
     I did commend your Highness' letters to them,
     Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
     My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
     Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
     From Goneril his mistress salutations;  
     Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
     Which presently they read; on whose contents,
     They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
     Commanded me to follow and attend
     The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
     And meeting here the other messenger,
     Whose welcome I perceiv'd had poison'd mine-
     Being the very fellow which of late
     Display'd so saucily against your Highness-
     Having more man than wit about me, drew.
     He rais'd the house with loud and coward cries.
     Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
     The shame which here it suffers.
  Fool. Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way.

          Fathers that wear rags
            Do make their children blind;
          But fathers that bear bags
            Shall see their children kind.
          Fortune, that arrant whore,  
          Ne'er turns the key to th' poor.

     But for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy
     daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
  Lear. O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
     Hysterica passio! Down, thou climbing sorrow!
     Thy element's below! Where is this daughter?
  Kent. With the Earl, sir, here within.
  Lear. Follow me not;
     Stay here.                                            Exit.
  Gent. Made you no more offence but what you speak of?
  Kent. None.
     How chance the King comes with so small a number?
  Fool. An thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question,
     thou'dst well deserv'd it.
  Kent. Why, fool?
  Fool. We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there's no
     labouring i' th' winter. All that follow their noses are led by
     their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty
     but can smell him that's stinking. Let go thy hold when a great  
     wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following
     it; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after.
     When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. I
     would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
          That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
            And follows but for form,
          Will pack when it begins to rain
            And leave thee in the storm.
          But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
            And let the wise man fly.
          The knave turns fool that runs away;
            The fool no knave, perdy.
  Kent. Where learn'd you this, fool?
  Fool. Not i' th' stocks, fool.

                      Enter Lear and Gloucester

  Lear. Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
     They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches-
     The images of revolt and flying off!  
     Fetch me a better answer.
  Glou. My dear lord,
     You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
     How unremovable and fix'd he is
     In his own course.
  Lear. Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
     Fiery? What quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
     I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
  Glou. Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.
  Lear. Inform'd them? Dost thou understand me, man?
  Glou. Ay, my good lord.
  Lear. The King would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
     Would with his daughter speak, commands her service.
     Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood!
     Fiery? the fiery Duke? Tell the hot Duke that-
     No, but not yet! May be he is not well.
     Infirmity doth still neglect all office
     Whereto our health is bound. We are not ourselves
     When nature, being oppress'd, commands the mind
     To suffer with the body. I'll forbear;  
     And am fallen out with my more headier will,
     To take the indispos'd and sickly fit
     For the sound man.- Death on my state! Wherefore
     Should be sit here? This act persuades me
     That this remotion of the Duke and her
     Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.
     Go tell the Duke and 's wife I'ld speak with them-
     Now, presently. Bid them come forth and hear me,
     Or at their chamber door I'll beat the drum
     Till it cry sleep to death.
  Glou. I would have all well betwixt you.                 Exit.
  Lear. O me, my heart, my rising heart! But down!
  Fool. Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she
     put 'em i' th' paste alive. She knapp'd 'em o' th' coxcombs with
     a stick and cried 'Down, wantons, down!' 'Twas her brother that,
     in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.

             Enter Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, Servants.

  Lear. Good morrow to you both.  
  Corn. Hail to your Grace!
                                       Kent here set at liberty.
  Reg. I am glad to see your Highness.
  Lear. Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
     I have to think so. If thou shouldst not be glad,
     I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
     Sepulchring an adultress. [To Kent] O, are you free?
     Some other time for that.- Beloved Regan,
     Thy sister's naught. O Regan, she hath tied
     Sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here!
                                   [Lays his hand on his heart.]
     I can scarce speak to thee. Thou'lt not believe
     With how deprav'd a quality- O Regan!
  Reg. I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope
     You less know how to value her desert
     Than she to scant her duty.
  Lear. Say, how is that?
  Reg. I cannot think my sister in the least
     Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
     She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,  
     'Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
     As clears her from all blame.
  Lear. My curses on her!
  Reg. O, sir, you are old!
     Nature in you stands on the very verge
     Of her confine. You should be rul'd, and led
     By some discretion that discerns your state
     Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you
     That to our sister you do make return;
     Say you have wrong'd her, sir.
  Lear. Ask her forgiveness?
     Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
     'Dear daughter, I confess that I am old.          [Kneels.]
     Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg
     That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.'
  Reg. Good sir, no more! These are unsightly tricks.
     Return you to my sister.
  Lear. [rises] Never, Regan!
     She hath abated me of half my train;
     Look'd black upon me; struck me with her tongue,  
     Most serpent-like, upon the very heart.
     All the stor'd vengeances of heaven fall
     On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
     You taking airs, with lameness!
  Corn. Fie, sir, fie!
  Lear. You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
     Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
     You fen-suck'd fogs, drawn by the pow'rful sun,
     To fall and blast her pride!
  Reg. O the blest gods! so will you wish on me
     When the rash mood is on.
  Lear. No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse.
     Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
     Thee o'er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce; but thine
     Do comfort, and not burn. 'Tis not in thee
     To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
     To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
     And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
     Against my coming in. Thou better know'st
     The offices of nature, bond of childhood,  
     Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude.
     Thy half o' th' kingdom hast thou not forgot,
     Wherein I thee endow'd.
  Reg. Good sir, to th' purpose.
                                                  Tucket within.
  Lear. Who put my man i' th' stocks?
  Corn. What trumpet's that?
  Reg. I know't- my sister's. This approves her letter,
     That she would soon be here.

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     Is your lady come?
  Lear. This is a slave, whose easy-borrowed pride
     Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
     Out, varlet, from my sight!
  Corn. What means your Grace?

                            Enter Goneril.
  
  Lear. Who stock'd my servant? Regan, I have good hope
     Thou didst not know on't.- Who comes here? O heavens!
     If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
     Allow obedience- if yourselves are old,
     Make it your cause! Send down, and take my part!
     [To Goneril] Art not asham'd to look upon this beard?-
     O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
  Gon. Why not by th' hand, sir? How have I offended?
     All's not offence that indiscretion finds
     And dotage terms so.
  Lear. O sides, you are too tough!
     Will you yet hold? How came my man i' th' stocks?
  Corn. I set him there, sir; but his own disorders
     Deserv'd much less advancement.
  Lear. You? Did you?
  Reg. I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
     If, till the expiration of your month,
     You will return and sojourn with my sister,
     Dismissing half your train, come then to me.
     I am now from home, and out of that provision  
     Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
  Lear. Return to her, and fifty men dismiss'd?
     No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
     To wage against the enmity o' th' air,
     To be a comrade with the wolf and owl-
     Necessity's sharp pinch! Return with her?
     Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
     Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
     To knee his throne, and, squire-like, pension beg
     To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
     Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
     To this detested groom.                 [Points at Oswald.]
  Gon. At your choice, sir.
  Lear. I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad.
     I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell.
     We'll no more meet, no more see one another.
     But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
     Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
     Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil,
     A plague sore, an embossed carbuncle  
     In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee.
     Let shame come when it will, I do not call it.
     I do not bid the Thunder-bearer shoot
     Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.
     Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure;
     I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,
     I and my hundred knights.
  Reg. Not altogether so.
     I look'd not for you yet, nor am provided
     For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;
     For those that mingle reason with your passion
     Must be content to think you old, and so-
     But she knows what she does.
  Lear. Is this well spoken?
  Reg. I dare avouch it, sir. What, fifty followers?
     Is it not well? What should you need of more?
     Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
     Speak 'gainst so great a number? How in one house
     Should many people, under two commands,
     Hold amity? 'Tis hard; almost impossible.  
  Gon. Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
     From those that she calls servants, or from mine?
  Reg. Why not, my lord? If then they chanc'd to slack ye,
     We could control them. If you will come to me
     (For now I spy a danger), I entreat you
     To bring but five-and-twenty. To no more
     Will I give place or notice.
  Lear. I gave you all-
  Reg. And in good time you gave it!
  Lear. Made you my guardians, my depositaries;
     But kept a reservation to be followed
     With such a number. What, must I come to you
     With five-and-twenty, Regan? Said you so?
  Reg. And speak't again my lord. No more with me.
  Lear. Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour'd
     When others are more wicked; not being the worst
     Stands in some rank of praise. [To Goneril] I'll go with thee.
     Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,
     And thou art twice her love.
  Gon. Hear, me, my lord.  
     What need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,
     To follow in a house where twice so many
     Have a command to tend you?
  Reg. What need one?
  Lear. O, reason not the need! Our basest beggars
     Are in the poorest thing superfluous.
     Allow not nature more than nature needs,
     Man's life is cheap as beast's. Thou art a lady:
     If only to go warm were gorgeous,
     Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st
     Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need-
     You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
     You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
     As full of grief as age; wretched in both.
     If it be you that stirs these daughters' hearts
     Against their father, fool me not so much
     To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
     And let not women's weapons, water drops,
     Stain my man's cheeks! No, you unnatural hags!
     I will have such revenges on you both  
     That all the world shall- I will do such things-
     What they are yet, I know not; but they shall be
     The terrors of the earth! You think I'll weep.
     No, I'll not weep.
     I have full cause of weeping, but this heart
     Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
     Or ere I'll weep. O fool, I shall go mad!
              Exeunt Lear, Gloucester, Kent, and Fool. Storm and
                                                        tempest.
  Corn. Let us withdraw; 'twill be a storm.
  Reg. This house is little; the old man and 's people
     Cannot be well bestow'd.
  Gon. 'Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest
     And must needs taste his folly.
  Reg. For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
     But not one follower.
  Gon. So am I purpos'd.
     Where is my Lord of Gloucester?
  Corn. Followed the old man forth.
  
                          Enter Gloucester.

     He is return'd.
  Glou. The King is in high rage.
  Corn. Whither is he going?
  Glou. He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.
  Corn. 'Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.
  Gon. My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
  Glou. Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
     Do sorely ruffle. For many miles about
     There's scarce a bush.
  Reg. O, sir, to wilful men
     The injuries that they themselves procure
     Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
     He is attended with a desperate train,
     And what they may incense him to, being apt
     To have his ear abus'd, wisdom bids fear.
  Corn. Shut up your doors, my lord: 'tis a wild night.
     My Regan counsels well. Come out o' th' storm.        [Exeunt.]




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. Scene I.
A heath.

Storm still. Enter Kent and a Gentleman at several doors.

  Kent. Who's there, besides foul weather?
  Gent. One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
  Kent. I know you. Where's the King?
  Gent. Contending with the fretful elements;
     Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
     Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
     That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
     Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
     Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
     Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
     The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
     This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
     The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
     Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
     And bids what will take all.
  Kent. But who is with him?
  Gent. None but the fool, who labours to outjest  
     His heart-struck injuries.
  Kent. Sir, I do know you,
     And dare upon the warrant of my note
     Commend a dear thing to you. There is division
     (Although as yet the face of it be cover'd
     With mutual cunning) 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;
     Who have (as who have not, that their great stars
     Thron'd and set high?) servants, who seem no less,
     Which are to France the spies and speculations
     Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen,
     Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes,
     Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
     Against the old kind King, or something deeper,
     Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings-
     But, true it is, from France there comes a power
     Into this scattered kingdom, who already,
     Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
     In some of our best ports and are at point
     To show their open banner. Now to you:
     If on my credit you dare build so far  
     To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
     Some that will thank you, making just report
     Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
     The King hath cause to plain.
     I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
     And from some knowledge and assurance offer
     This office to you.
  Gent. I will talk further with you.
  Kent. No, do not.
     For confirmation that I am much more
     Than my out-wall, open this purse and take
     What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia
     (As fear not but you shall), show her this ring,
     And she will tell you who your fellow is
     That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
     I will go seek the King.
  Gent. Give me your hand. Have you no more to say?
  Kent. Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
     That, when we have found the King (in which your pain
     That way, I'll this), he that first lights on him  
     Holla the other.
                                             Exeunt [severally].




Scene II.
Another part of the heath.

Storm still. Enter Lear and Fool.

  Lear. Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!
     You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
     Till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks!
     You sulph'rous and thought-executing fires,
     Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
     Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,
     Strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world,
     Crack Nature's moulds, all germains spill at once,
     That makes ingrateful man!
  Fool. O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this
     rain water out o' door. Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters
     blessing! Here's a night pities nether wise men nor fools.
  Lear. Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!
     Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters.
     I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.
     I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,
     You owe me no subscription. Then let fall  
     Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave,
     A poor, infirm, weak, and despis'd old man.
     But yet I call you servile ministers,
     That will with two pernicious daughters join
     Your high-engender'd battles 'gainst a head
     So old and white as this! O! O! 'tis foul!
  Fool. He that has a house to put 's head in has a good head-piece.
          The codpiece that will house
            Before the head has any,
          The head and he shall louse:
            So beggars marry many.
          The man that makes his toe
            What he his heart should make
          Shall of a corn cry woe,
            And turn his sleep to wake.
     For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a
     glass.

                             Enter Kent.
  
  Lear. No, I will be the pattern of all patience;
     I will say nothing.
  Kent. Who's there?
  Fool. Marry, here's grace and a codpiece; that's a wise man and a
     fool.
  Kent. Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
     Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies
     Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
     And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
     Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
     Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
     Remember to have heard. Man's nature cannot carry
     Th' affliction nor the fear.
  Lear. Let the great gods,
     That keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads,
     Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
     That hast within thee undivulged crimes
     Unwhipp'd of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand;
     Thou perjur'd, and thou simular man of virtue
     That art incestuous. Caitiff, in pieces shake  
     That under covert and convenient seeming
     Hast practis'd on man's life. Close pent-up guilts,
     Rive your concealing continents, and cry
     These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
     More sinn'd against than sinning.
  Kent. Alack, bareheaded?
     Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
     Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.
     Repose you there, whilst I to this hard house
     (More harder than the stones whereof 'tis rais'd,
     Which even but now, demanding after you,
     Denied me to come in) return, and force
     Their scanted courtesy.
  Lear. My wits begin to turn.
     Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art cold?
     I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
     The art of our necessities is strange,
     That can make vile things precious. Come, your hovel.
     Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
     That's sorry yet for thee.  
  Fool. [sings]

          He that has and a little tiny wit-
            With hey, ho, the wind and the rain-
          Must make content with his fortunes fit,
             For the rain it raineth every day.

  Lear. True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.
                                         Exeunt [Lear and Kent].
  Fool. This is a brave night to cool a courtesan. I'll speak a
     prophecy ere I go:
          When priests are more in word than matter;
          When brewers mar their malt with water;
          When nobles are their tailors' tutors,
          No heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;
          When every case in law is right,
          No squire in debt nor no poor knight;
          When slanders do not live in tongues,
          Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
          When usurers tell their gold i' th' field,  
          And bawds and whores do churches build:
          Then shall the realm of Albion
          Come to great confusion.
          Then comes the time, who lives to see't,
          That going shall be us'd with feet.
     This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before his time.
Exit.




Scene III.
Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Gloucester and Edmund.

  Glou. Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing! When
     I desir'd their leave that I might pity him, they took from me
     the use of mine own house, charg'd me on pain of perpetual
     displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any
     way sustain him.
  Edm. Most savage and unnatural!
  Glou. Go to; say you nothing. There is division betwixt the Dukes,
     and a worse matter than that. I have received a letter this
     night- 'tis dangerous to be spoken- I have lock'd the letter in
     my closet. These injuries the King now bears will be revenged
     home; there's part of a power already footed; we must incline to
     the King. I will seek him and privily relieve him. Go you and
     maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him
     perceived. If he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. Though I
     die for't, as no less is threat'ned me, the King my old master
     must be relieved. There is some strange thing toward, Edmund.
     Pray you be careful.                                  Exit.  
  Edm. This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke
     Instantly know, and of that letter too.
     This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
     That which my father loses- no less than all.
     The younger rises when the old doth fall.             Exit.




Scene IV.
The heath. Before a hovel.

Storm still. Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.

  Kent. Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.
     The tyranny of the open night 's too rough
     For nature to endure.
  Lear. Let me alone.
  Kent. Good my lord, enter here.
  Lear. Wilt break my heart?
  Kent. I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
  Lear. Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
     Invades us to the skin. So 'tis to thee;
     But where the greater malady is fix'd,
     The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'dst shun a bear;
     But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
     Thou'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. When the mind's free,
     The body's delicate. The tempest in my mind
     Doth from my senses take all feeling else
     Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
     Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand  
     For lifting food to't? But I will punish home!
     No, I will weep no more. In such a night
     'To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure.
     In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!
     Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all!
     O, that way madness lies; let me shun that!
     No more of that.
  Kent. Good my lord, enter here.
  Lear. Prithee go in thyself; seek thine own ease.
     This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
     On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.
     [To the Fool] In, boy; go first.- You houseless poverty-
     Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
                                                    Exit [Fool].
     Poor naked wretches, wheresoe'er you are,
     That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
     How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
     Your loop'd and window'd raggedness, defend you
     From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en
     Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;  
     Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
     That thou mayst shake the superflux to them
     And show the heavens more just.
  Edg. [within] Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!

                     Enter Fool [from the hovel].

  Fool. Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit. Help me, help me!
  Kent. Give me thy hand. Who's there?
  Fool. A spirit, a spirit! He says his name's poor Tom.
  Kent. What art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw?
     Come forth.

                 Enter Edgar [disguised as a madman].

  Edg. Away! the foul fiend follows me! Through the sharp hawthorn
     blows the cold wind. Humh! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
  Lear. Hast thou given all to thy two daughters, and art thou come
     to this?
  Edg. Who gives anything to poor Tom? whom the foul fiend hath led  
     through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlpool, o'er
     bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and
     halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge, made him proud
     of heart, to ride on a bay trotting horse over four-inch'd
     bridges, to course his own shadow for a traitor. Bless thy five
     wits! Tom 's acold. O, do de, do de, do de. Bless thee from
     whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some charity,
     whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him now- and there-
     and there again- and there!
                                                    Storm still.
  Lear. What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
     Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give 'em all?
  Fool. Nay, he reserv'd a blanket, else we had been all sham'd.
  Lear. Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
     Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
  Kent. He hath no daughters, sir.
  Lear. Death, traitor! nothing could have subdu'd nature
     To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
     Is it the fashion that discarded fathers
     Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?  
     Judicious punishment! 'Twas this flesh begot
     Those pelican daughters.
  Edg. Pillicock sat on Pillicock's Hill. 'Allow, 'allow, loo, loo!
  Fool. This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
  Edg. Take heed o' th' foul fiend; obey thy parents: keep thy word
     justly; swear not; commit not with man's sworn spouse; set not
     thy sweet heart on proud array. Tom 's acold.
  Lear. What hast thou been?
  Edg. A servingman, proud in heart and mind; that curl'd my hair,
     wore gloves in my cap; serv'd the lust of my mistress' heart and
     did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as I spake
     words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven; one that
     slept in the contriving of lust, and wak'd to do it. Wine lov'd
     I deeply, dice dearly; and in woman out-paramour'd the Turk.
     False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox
     in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey.
     Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray
     thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy foot out of brothel, thy hand
     out of placket, thy pen from lender's book, and defy the foul
     fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind; says  
     suum, mun, hey, no, nonny. Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa! let
     him trot by.
                                                    Storm still.
  Lear. Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy
     uncover'd body this extremity of the skies. Is man no more than
     this? Consider him well. Thou ow'st the worm no silk, the beast
     no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! Here's three
     on's are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself;
     unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor, bare, forked
     animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings! Come, unbutton
     here.
                                         [Tears at his clothes.]
  Fool. Prithee, nuncle, be contented! 'Tis a naughty night to swim
     in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher's
     heart- a small spark, all the rest on's body cold. Look, here
     comes a walking fire.

                    Enter Gloucester with a torch.

  Edg. This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet. He begins at curfew,  
     and walks till the first cock. He gives the web and the pin,
     squints the eye, and makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat,
     and hurts the poor creature of earth.

           Saint Withold footed thrice the 'old;
           He met the nightmare, and her nine fold;
              Bid her alight
              And her troth plight,
           And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!

  Kent. How fares your Grace?
  Lear. What's he?
  Kent. Who's there? What is't you seek?
  Glou. What are you there? Your names?
  Edg. Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the todpole,
     the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when
     the foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for sallets, swallows the
     old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the
     standing pool; who is whipp'd from tithing to tithing, and
     stock-punish'd and imprison'd; who hath had three suits to his  
     back, six shirts to his body, horse to ride, and weapons to
     wear;

          But mice and rats, and such small deer,
          Have been Tom's food for seven long year.

     Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin! peace, thou fiend!
  Glou. What, hath your Grace no better company?
  Edg. The prince of darkness is a gentleman!
     Modo he's call'd, and Mahu.
  Glou. Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
     That it doth hate what gets it.
  Edg. Poor Tom 's acold.
  Glou. Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer
     T' obey in all your daughters' hard commands.
     Though their injunction be to bar my doors
     And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
     Yet have I ventur'd to come seek you out
     And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
  Lear. First let me talk with this philosopher.  
     What is the cause of thunder?
  Kent. Good my lord, take his offer; go into th' house.
  Lear. I'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.
     What is your study?
  Edg. How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.
  Lear. Let me ask you one word in private.
  Kent. Importune him once more to go, my lord.
     His wits begin t' unsettle.
  Glou. Canst thou blame him?
                                                    Storm still.
     His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!
     He said it would be thus- poor banish'd man!
     Thou say'st the King grows mad: I'll tell thee, friend,
     I am almost mad myself. I had a son,
     Now outlaw'd from my blood. He sought my life
     But lately, very late. I lov'd him, friend-
     No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,
     The grief hath craz'd my wits. What a night 's this!
     I do beseech your Grace-
  Lear. O, cry you mercy, sir.  
     Noble philosopher, your company.
  Edg. Tom's acold.
  Glou. In, fellow, there, into th' hovel; keep thee warm.
  Lear. Come, let's in all.
  Kent. This way, my lord.
  Lear. With him!
     I will keep still with my philosopher.
  Kent. Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
  Glou. Take him you on.
  Kent. Sirrah, come on; go along with us.
  Lear. Come, good Athenian.
  Glou. No words, no words! hush.
  Edg. Child Rowland to the dark tower came;
     His word was still

          Fie, foh, and fum!
          I smell the blood of a British man.
                                                         Exeunt.

Scene V.
Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Cornwall and Edmund.

  Corn. I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
  Edm. How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to
     loyalty, something fears me to think of.
  Corn. I now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil
     disposition made him seek his death; but a provoking merit, set
     awork by a reproveable badness in himself.
  Edm. How malicious is my fortune that I must repent to be just!
     This is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an
     intelligent party to the advantages of France. O heavens! that
     this treason were not- or not I the detector!
  Corn. Go with me to the Duchess.
  Edm. If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty
     business in hand.
  Corn. True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester.
     Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our
     apprehension.
  Edm. [aside] If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his  
     suspicion more fully.- I will persever in my course of loyalty,
     though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
  Corn. I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer
     father in my love.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene VI.
A farmhouse near Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Gloucester, Lear, Kent, Fool, and Edgar.

  Glou. Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. I will
     piece out the comfort with what addition I can. I will not be
     long from you.
  Kent. All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience.
     The gods reward your kindness!
                                              Exit [Gloucester].
  Edg. Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the
     lake of darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
  Fool. Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a
     yeoman.
  Lear. A king, a king!
  Fool. No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son; for he's a
     mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.
  Lear. To have a thousand with red burning spits
     Come hizzing in upon 'em-
  Edg. The foul fiend bites my back.
  Fool. He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's
     health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.  
  Lear. It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
     [To Edgar] Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer.
     [To the Fool] Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she-foxes!
  Edg. Look, where he stands and glares! Want'st thou eyes at trial,
     madam?

             Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me.

  Fool.      Her boat hath a leak,
             And she must not speak
           Why she dares not come over to thee.

  Edg. The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale.
     Hoppedance cries in Tom's belly for two white herring. Croak
     not, black angel; I have no food for thee.
  Kent. How do you, sir? Stand you not so amaz'd.
     Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
  Lear. I'll see their trial first. Bring in their evidence.
     [To Edgar] Thou, robed man of justice, take thy place.
     [To the Fool] And thou, his yokefellow of equity,  
     Bench by his side. [To Kent] You are o' th' commission,
     Sit you too.
  Edg. Let us deal justly.

          Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
            Thy sheep be in the corn;
          And for one blast of thy minikin mouth
            Thy sheep shall take no harm.

     Purr! the cat is gray.
  Lear. Arraign her first. 'Tis Goneril. I here take my oath before
     this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor King her father.
  Fool. Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
  Lear. She cannot deny it.
  Fool. Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.
  Lear. And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim
     What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
     Arms, arms! sword! fire! Corruption in the place!
     False justicer, why hast thou let her scape?
  Edg. Bless thy five wits!  
  Kent. O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
     That you so oft have boasted to retain?
  Edg. [aside] My tears begin to take his part so much
     They'll mar my counterfeiting.
  Lear. The little dogs and all,
     Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
  Edg. Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
           Be thy mouth or black or white,
           Tooth that poisons if it bite;
           Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,
           Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,
           Bobtail tyke or trundle-tall-
           Tom will make them weep and wail;
           For, with throwing thus my head,
           Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
     Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and fairs and market
     towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.
  Lear. Then let them anatomize Regan. See what breeds about her
     heart. Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard
     hearts? [To Edgar] You, sir- I entertain you for one of my  
     hundred; only I do not like the fashion of your garments. You'll
     say they are Persian attire; but let them be chang'd.
  Kent. Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
  Lear. Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains.
     So, so, so. We'll go to supper i' th' morning. So, so, so.
  Fool. And I'll go to bed at noon.

                          Enter Gloucester.

  Glou. Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?
  Kent. Here, sir; but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
  Glou. Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms.
     I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him.
     There is a litter ready; lay him in't
     And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
     Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master.
     If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
     With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
     Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up!
     And follow me, that will to some provision  
     Give thee quick conduct.
  Kent. Oppressed nature sleeps.
     This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
     Which, if convenience will not allow,
     Stand in hard cure. [To the Fool] Come, help to bear thy master.
     Thou must not stay behind.
  Glou. Come, come, away!
                                         Exeunt [all but Edgar].
  Edg. When we our betters see bearing our woes,
     We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
     Who alone suffers suffers most i' th' mind,
     Leaving free things and happy shows behind;
     But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip
     When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
     How light and portable my pain seems now,
     When that which makes me bend makes the King bow,
     He childed as I fathered! Tom, away!
     Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
     When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,
     In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.  
     What will hap more to-night, safe scape the King!
     Lurk, lurk.                                         [Exit.]




Scene VII.
Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Cornwall, Regan, Goneril, [Edmund the] Bastard, and Servants.

  Corn. [to Goneril] Post speedily to my lord your husband, show him
     this letter. The army of France is landed.- Seek out the traitor
     Gloucester.
                                  [Exeunt some of the Servants.]
  Reg. Hang him instantly.
  Gon. Pluck out his eyes.
  Corn. Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our sister
     company. The revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous
     father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke where you
     are going, to a most festinate preparation. We are bound to the
     like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us.
     Farewell, dear sister; farewell, my Lord of Gloucester.

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     How now? Where's the King?  
  Osw. My Lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence.
     Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
     Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
     Who, with some other of the lord's dependants,
     Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast
     To have well-armed friends.
  Corn. Get horses for your mistress.
  Gon. Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
  Corn. Edmund, farewell.
                           Exeunt Goneril, [Edmund, and Oswald].
     Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
     Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
                                        [Exeunt other Servants.]
     Though well we may not pass upon his life
     Without the form of justice, yet our power
     Shall do a court'sy to our wrath, which men
     May blame, but not control.

            Enter Gloucester, brought in by two or three.
  
     Who's there? the traitor?
  Reg. Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.
  Corn. Bind fast his corky arms.
  Glou. What mean, your Graces? Good my friends, consider
     You are my guests. Do me no foul play, friends.
  Corn. Bind him, I say.
                                            [Servants bind him.]
  Reg. Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
  Glou. Unmerciful lady as you are, I am none.
  Corn. To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find-
                                       [Regan plucks his beard.]
  Glou. By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
     To pluck me by the beard.
  Reg. So white, and such a traitor!
  Glou. Naughty lady,
     These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
     Will quicken, and accuse thee. I am your host.
     With robber's hands my hospitable favours
     You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
  Corn. Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?  
  Reg. Be simple-answer'd, for we know the truth.
  Corn. And what confederacy have you with the traitors
     Late footed in the kingdom?
  Reg. To whose hands have you sent the lunatic King?
     Speak.
  Glou. I have a letter guessingly set down,
     Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
     And not from one oppos'd.
  Corn. Cunning.
  Reg. And false.
  Corn. Where hast thou sent the King?
  Glou. To Dover.
  Reg. Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charg'd at peril-
  Corn. Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.
  Glou. I am tied to th' stake, and I must stand the course.
  Reg. Wherefore to Dover, sir?
  Glou. Because I would not see thy cruel nails
     Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
     In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
     The sea, with such a storm as his bare head  
     In hell-black night endur'd, would have buoy'd up
     And quench'd the steeled fires.
     Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
     If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,
     Thou shouldst have said, 'Good porter, turn the key.'
     All cruels else subscrib'd. But I shall see
     The winged vengeance overtake such children.
  Corn. See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
     Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
  Glou. He that will think to live till he be old,
     Give me some help!- O cruel! O ye gods!
  Reg. One side will mock another. Th' other too!
  Corn. If you see vengeance-
  1. Serv. Hold your hand, my lord!
     I have serv'd you ever since I was a child;
     But better service have I never done you
     Than now to bid you hold.
  Reg. How now, you dog?
  1. Serv. If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
     I'ld shake it on this quarrel.  
  Reg. What do you mean?
  Corn. My villain!                               Draw and fight.
  1. Serv. Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
  Reg. Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus?
                        She takes a sword and runs at him behind.
  1. Serv. O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
     To see some mischief on him. O!                     He dies.
  Corn. Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
     Where is thy lustre now?
  Glou. All dark and comfortless! Where's my son Edmund?
     Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
     To quit this horrid act.
  Reg. Out, treacherous villain!
     Thou call'st on him that hates thee. It was he
     That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
     Who is too good to pity thee.
  Glou. O my follies! Then Edgar was abus'd.
     Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
  Reg. Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
     His way to Dover.  
                                     Exit [one] with Gloucester.
     How is't, my lord? How look you?
  Corn. I have receiv'd a hurt. Follow me, lady.
     Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave
     Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace.
     Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.
                                  Exit [Cornwall, led by Regan].
  2. Serv. I'll never care what wickedness I do,
     If this man come to good.
  3. Serv. If she live long,
     And in the end meet the old course of death,
     Women will all turn monsters.
  2. Serv. Let's follow the old Earl, and get the bedlam
     To lead him where he would. His roguish madness
     Allows itself to anything.
  3. Serv. Go thou. I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
     To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. Scene I.
The heath.

Enter Edgar.

  Edg. Yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd,
     Than still contemn'd and flatter'd. To be worst,
     The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
     Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear.
     The lamentable change is from the best;
     The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,
     Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace!
     The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
     Owes nothing to thy blasts.

                 Enter Gloucester, led by an Old Man.

     But who comes here?
     My father, poorly led? World, world, O world!
     But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
     Life would not yield to age.
  Old Man. O my good lord,  
     I have been your tenant, and your father's tenant,
     These fourscore years.
  Glou. Away, get thee away! Good friend, be gone.
     Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
     Thee they may hurt.
  Old Man. You cannot see your way.
  Glou. I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
     I stumbled when I saw. Full oft 'tis seen
     Our means secure us, and our mere defects
     Prove our commodities. Ah dear son Edgar,
     The food of thy abused father's wrath!
     Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
     I'ld say I had eyes again!
  Old Man. How now? Who's there?
  Edg. [aside] O gods! Who is't can say 'I am at the worst'?
     I am worse than e'er I was.
  Old Man. 'Tis poor mad Tom.
  Edg. [aside] And worse I may be yet. The worst is not
     So long as we can say 'This is the worst.'
  Old Man. Fellow, where goest?  
  Glou. Is it a beggarman?
  Old Man. Madman and beggar too.
  Glou. He has some reason, else he could not beg.
     I' th' last night's storm I such a fellow saw,
     Which made me think a man a worm. My son
     Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
     Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since.
     As flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods.
     They kill us for their sport.
  Edg. [aside] How should this be?
     Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
     Ang'ring itself and others.- Bless thee, master!
  Glou. Is that the naked fellow?
  Old Man. Ay, my lord.
  Glou. Then prithee get thee gone. If for my sake
     Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain
     I' th' way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;
     And bring some covering for this naked soul,
     Who I'll entreat to lead me.
  Old Man. Alack, sir, he is mad!  
  Glou. 'Tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind.
     Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.
     Above the rest, be gone.
  Old Man. I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
     Come on't what will.                                  Exit.
  Glou. Sirrah naked fellow-
  Edg. Poor Tom's acold. [Aside] I cannot daub it further.
  Glou. Come hither, fellow.
  Edg. [aside] And yet I must.- Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
  Glou. Know'st thou the way to Dover?
  Edg. Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. Poor Tom hath been
     scar'd out of his good wits. Bless thee, good man's son, from
     the foul fiend! Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once: of
     lust, as Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of
     stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of mopping and
     mowing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting women. So,
     bless thee, master!
  Glou. Here, take this Purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues
     Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched
     Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still!  
     Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
     That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
     Because he does not feel, feel your pow'r quickly;
     So distribution should undo excess,
     And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
  Edg. Ay, master.
  Glou. There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
     Looks fearfully in the confined deep.
     Bring me but to the very brim of it,
     And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
     With something rich about me. From that place
     I shall no leading need.
  Edg. Give me thy arm.
     Poor Tom shall lead thee.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
Before the Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Goneril and [Edmund the] Bastard.

  Gon. Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband
     Not met us on the way.

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     Now, where's your master?
  Osw. Madam, within, but never man so chang'd.
     I told him of the army that was landed:
     He smil'd at it. I told him you were coming:
     His answer was, 'The worse.' Of Gloucester's treachery
     And of the loyal service of his son
     When I inform'd him, then he call'd me sot
     And told me I had turn'd the wrong side out.
     What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
     What like, offensive.
  Gon. [to Edmund] Then shall you go no further.
     It is the cowish terror of his spirit,  
     That dares not undertake. He'll not feel wrongs
     Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
     May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother.
     Hasten his musters and conduct his pow'rs.
     I must change arms at home and give the distaff
     Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
     Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear
     (If you dare venture in your own behalf)
     A mistress's command. Wear this.          [Gives a favour.]
     Spare speech.
     Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak,
     Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
     Conceive, and fare thee well.
  Edm. Yours in the ranks of death!                        Exit.
  Gon. My most dear Gloucester!
     O, the difference of man and man!
     To thee a woman's services are due;
     My fool usurps my body.
  Osw. Madam, here comes my lord.                          Exit.
  
                            Enter Albany.

  Gon. I have been worth the whistle.
  Alb. O Goneril,
     You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
     Blows in your face! I fear your disposition.
     That nature which contemns it origin
     Cannot be bordered certain in itself.
     She that herself will sliver and disbranch
     From her material sap, perforce must wither
     And come to deadly use.
  Gon. No more! The text is foolish.
  Alb. Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
     Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
     Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?
     A father, and a gracious aged man,
     Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,
     Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.
     Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
     A man, a prince, by him so benefited!  
     If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
     Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
     It will come,
     Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
     Like monsters of the deep.
  Gon. Milk-liver'd man!
     That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
     Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
     Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know'st
     Fools do those villains pity who are punish'd
     Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy drum?
     France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,
     With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,
     Whiles thou, a moral fool, sit'st still, and criest
     'Alack, why does he so?'
  Alb. See thyself, devil!
     Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
     So horrid as in woman.
  Gon. O vain fool!
  Alb. Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame!  
     Bemonster not thy feature! Were't my fitness
     To let these hands obey my blood,
     They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
     Thy flesh and bones. Howe'er thou art a fiend,
     A woman's shape doth shield thee.
  Gon. Marry, your manhood mew!

                          Enter a Gentleman.

  Alb. What news?
  Gent. O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall 's dead,
     Slain by his servant, going to put out
     The other eye of Gloucester.
  Alb. Gloucester's eyes?
  Gent. A servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,
     Oppos'd against the act, bending his sword
     To his great master; who, thereat enrag'd,
     Flew on him, and amongst them fell'd him dead;
     But not without that harmful stroke which since
     Hath pluck'd him after.  
  Alb. This shows you are above,
     You justicers, that these our nether crimes
     So speedily can venge! But O poor Gloucester!
     Lose he his other eye?
  Gent. Both, both, my lord.
     This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer.
     'Tis from your sister.
  Gon. [aside] One way I like this well;
     But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
     May all the building in my fancy pluck
     Upon my hateful life. Another way
     The news is not so tart.- I'll read, and answer.
Exit.
  Alb. Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
  Gent. Come with my lady hither.
  Alb. He is not here.
  Gent. No, my good lord; I met him back again.
  Alb. Knows he the wickedness?
  Gent. Ay, my good lord. 'Twas he inform'd against him,
     And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment  
     Might have the freer course.
  Alb. Gloucester, I live
     To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the King,
     And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend.
     Tell me what more thou know'st.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene III.
The French camp near Dover.

Enter Kent and a Gentleman.

  Kent. Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you the
     reason?
  Gent. Something he left imperfect in the state, which since his
     coming forth is thought of, which imports to the kingdom so much
     fear and danger that his personal return was most required and
     necessary.
  Kent. Who hath he left behind him general?
  Gent. The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.
  Kent. Did your letters pierce the Queen to any demonstration of
     grief?
  Gent. Ay, sir. She took them, read them in my presence,
     And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
     Her delicate cheek. It seem'd she was a queen
     Over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
     Sought to be king o'er her.
  Kent. O, then it mov'd her?
  Gent. Not to a rage. Patience and sorrow strove  
     Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
     Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
     Were like, a better way. Those happy smilets
     That play'd on her ripe lip seem'd not to know
     What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence
     As pearls from diamonds dropp'd. In brief,
     Sorrow would be a rarity most belov'd,
     If all could so become it.
  Kent. Made she no verbal question?
  Gent. Faith, once or twice she heav'd the name of father
     Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart;
     Cried 'Sisters, sisters! Shame of ladies! Sisters!
     Kent! father! sisters! What, i' th' storm? i' th' night?
     Let pity not be believ'd!' There she shook
     The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
     And clamour moisten'd. Then away she started
     To deal with grief alone.
  Kent. It is the stars,
     The stars above us, govern our conditions;
     Else one self mate and mate could not beget  
     Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
  Gent. No.
  Kent. Was this before the King return'd?
  Gent. No, since.
  Kent. Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' th' town;
     Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
     What we are come about, and by no means
     Will yield to see his daughter.
  Gent. Why, good sir?
  Kent. A sovereign shame so elbows him; his own unkindness,
     That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
     To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
     To his dog-hearted daughters- these things sting
     His mind so venomously that burning shame
     Detains him from Cordelia.
  Gent. Alack, poor gentleman!
  Kent. Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
  Gent. 'Tis so; they are afoot.
  Kent. Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear
     And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause  
     Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
     When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
     Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you go
     Along with me.                                      Exeunt.




Scene IV.
The French camp.

Enter, with Drum and Colours, Cordelia, Doctor, and Soldiers.

  Cor. Alack, 'tis he! Why, he was met even now
     As mad as the vex'd sea, singing aloud,
     Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow weeds,
     With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo flow'rs,
     Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
     In our sustaining corn. A century send forth.
     Search every acre in the high-grown field
     And bring him to our eye. [Exit an Officer.] What can man's
        wisdom
     In the restoring his bereaved sense?
     He that helps him take all my outward worth.
  Doct. There is means, madam.
     Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
     The which he lacks. That to provoke in him
     Are many simples operative, whose power
     Will close the eye of anguish.
  Cor. All blest secrets,  
     All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,
     Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate
     In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him!
     Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life
     That wants the means to lead it.

                           Enter Messenger.

  Mess. News, madam.
     The British pow'rs are marching hitherward.
  Cor. 'Tis known before. Our preparation stands
     In expectation of them. O dear father,
     It is thy business that I go about.
     Therefore great France
     My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
     No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
     But love, dear love, and our ag'd father's right.
     Soon may I hear and see him!
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene V.
Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Regan and [Oswald the] Steward.

  Reg. But are my brother's pow'rs set forth?
  Osw. Ay, madam.
  Reg. Himself in person there?
  Osw. Madam, with much ado.
     Your sister is the better soldier.
  Reg. Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
  Osw. No, madam.
  Reg. What might import my sister's letter to him?
  Osw. I know not, lady.
  Reg. Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
     It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,
     To let him live. Where he arrives he moves
     All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone,
     In pity of his misery, to dispatch
     His nighted life; moreover, to descry
     The strength o' th' enemy.
  Osw. I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.  
  Reg. Our troops set forth to-morrow. Stay with us.
     The ways are dangerous.
  Osw. I may not, madam.
     My lady charg'd my duty in this business.
  Reg. Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
     Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
     Something- I know not what- I'll love thee much-
     Let me unseal the letter.
  Osw. Madam, I had rather-
  Reg. I know your lady does not love her husband;
     I am sure of that; and at her late being here
     She gave strange eliads and most speaking looks
     To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
  Osw. I, madam?
  Reg. I speak in understanding. Y'are! I know't.
     Therefore I do advise you take this note.
     My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk'd,
     And more convenient is he for my hand
     Than for your lady's. You may gather more.
     If you do find him, pray you give him this;  
     And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
     I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
     So farewell.
     If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
     Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
  Osw. Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
     What party I do follow.
  Reg. Fare thee well.                                   Exeunt.




Scene VI.
The country near Dover.

Enter Gloucester, and Edgar [like a Peasant].

  Glou. When shall I come to th' top of that same hill?
  Edg. You do climb up it now. Look how we labour.
  Glou. Methinks the ground is even.
  Edg. Horrible steep.
     Hark, do you hear the sea?
  Glou. No, truly.
  Edg. Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
     By your eyes' anguish.
  Glou. So may it be indeed.
     Methinks thy voice is alter'd, and thou speak'st
     In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
  Edg. Y'are much deceiv'd. In nothing am I chang'd
     But in my garments.
  Glou. Methinks y'are better spoken.
  Edg. Come on, sir; here's the place. Stand still. How fearful
     And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low!
     The crows and choughs that wing the midway air  
     Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down
     Hangs one that gathers sampire- dreadful trade!
     Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
     The fishermen that walk upon the beach
     Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
     Diminish'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy
     Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge
     That on th' unnumb'red idle pebble chafes
     Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more,
     Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
     Topple down headlong.
  Glou. Set me where you stand.
  Edg. Give me your hand. You are now within a foot
     Of th' extreme verge. For all beneath the moon
     Would I not leap upright.
  Glou. Let go my hand.
     Here, friend, is another purse; in it a jewel
     Well worth a poor man's taking. Fairies and gods
     Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off;
     Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.  
  Edg. Now fare ye well, good sir.
  Glou. With all my heart.
  Edg. [aside]. Why I do trifle thus with his despair
     Is done to cure it.
  Glou. O you mighty gods!                            He kneels.
     This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
     Shake patiently my great affliction off.
     If I could bear it longer and not fall
     To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
     My snuff and loathed part of nature should
     Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!
     Now, fellow, fare thee well.
                                  He falls [forward and swoons].
  Edg. Gone, sir, farewell.-
     And yet I know not how conceit may rob
     The treasury of life when life itself
     Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,
     By this had thought been past.- Alive or dead?
     Ho you, sir! friend! Hear you, sir? Speak!-
     Thus might he pass indeed. Yet he revives.  
     What are you, sir?
  Glou. Away, and let me die.
  Edg. Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
     So many fadom down precipitating,
     Thou'dst shiver'd like an egg; but thou dost breathe;
     Hast heavy substance; bleed'st not; speak'st; art sound.
     Ten masts at each make not the altitude
     Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.
     Thy life is a miracle. Speak yet again.
  Glou. But have I fall'n, or no?
  Edg. From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
     Look up a-height. The shrill-gorg'd lark so far
     Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.
  Glou. Alack, I have no eyes!
     Is wretchedness depriv'd that benefit
     To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort
     When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage
     And frustrate his proud will.
  Edg. Give me your arm.
     Up- so. How is't? Feel you your legs? You stand.  
  Glou. Too well, too well.
  Edg. This is above all strangeness.
     Upon the crown o' th' cliff what thing was that
     Which parted from you?
  Glou. A poor unfortunate beggar.
  Edg. As I stood here below, methought his eyes
     Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
     Horns whelk'd and wav'd like the enridged sea.
     It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,
     Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
     Of men's impossibility, have preserv'd thee.
  Glou. I do remember now. Henceforth I'll bear
     Affliction till it do cry out itself
     'Enough, enough,' and die. That thing you speak of,
     I took it for a man. Often 'twould say
     'The fiend, the fiend'- he led me to that place.
  Edg. Bear free and patient thoughts.

         Enter Lear, mad, [fantastically dressed with weeds].
  
     But who comes here?
     The safer sense will ne'er accommodate
     His master thus.
  Lear. No, they cannot touch me for coming;
     I am the King himself.
  Edg. O thou side-piercing sight!
  Lear. Nature 's above art in that respect. There's your press
     money. That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper. Draw me
     a clothier's yard. Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace; this piece
     of toasted cheese will do't. There's my gauntlet; I'll prove it
     on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird! i'
     th' clout, i' th' clout! Hewgh! Give the word.
  Edg. Sweet marjoram.
  Lear. Pass.
  Glou. I know that voice.
  Lear. Ha! Goneril with a white beard? They flatter'd me like a dog,
     and told me I had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones
     were there. To say 'ay' and 'no' to everything I said! 'Ay' and
     'no' too was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet me
     once, and the wind to make me chatter; when the thunder would  
     not peace at my bidding; there I found 'em, there I smelt 'em
     out. Go to, they are not men o' their words! They told me I was
     everything. 'Tis a lie- I am not ague-proof.
  Glou. The trick of that voice I do well remember.
     Is't not the King?
  Lear. Ay, every inch a king!
     When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
     I pardon that man's life. What was thy cause?
     Adultery?
     Thou shalt not die. Die for adultery? No.
     The wren goes to't, and the small gilded fly
     Does lecher in my sight.
     Let copulation thrive; for Gloucester's bastard son
     Was kinder to his father than my daughters
     Got 'tween the lawful sheets.
     To't, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.
     Behold yond simp'ring dame,
     Whose face between her forks presageth snow,
     That minces virtue, and does shake the head
     To hear of pleasure's name.  
     The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to't
     With a more riotous appetite.
     Down from the waist they are Centaurs,
     Though women all above.
     But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
     Beneath is all the fiend's.
     There's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulphurous pit;
     burning, scalding, stench, consumption. Fie, fie, fie! pah, pah!
     Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my
     imagination. There's money for thee.
  Glou. O, let me kiss that hand!
  Lear. Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.
  Glou. O ruin'd piece of nature! This great world
     Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?
  Lear. I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny at me?
     No, do thy worst, blind Cupid! I'll not love. Read thou this
     challenge; mark but the penning of it.
  Glou. Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.
  Edg. [aside] I would not take this from report. It is,
     And my heart breaks at it.  
  Lear. Read.
  Glou. What, with the case of eyes?
  Lear. O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no
     money in your purse? Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse
     in a light. Yet you see how this world goes.
  Glou. I see it feelingly.
  Lear. What, art mad? A man may see how the world goes with no eyes.
     Look with thine ears. See how yond justice rails upon yond
     simple thief. Hark in thine ear. Change places and, handy-dandy,
     which is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a
     farmer's dog bark at a beggar?
  Glou. Ay, sir.
  Lear. And the creature run from the cur? There thou mightst behold
     the great image of authority: a dog's obeyed in office.
     Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
     Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back.
     Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind
     For which thou whip'st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
     Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear;
     Robes and furr'd gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,  
     And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
     Arm it in rags, a pygmy's straw does pierce it.
     None does offend, none- I say none! I'll able 'em.
     Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
     To seal th' accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes
     And, like a scurvy politician, seem
     To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now!
     Pull off my boots. Harder, harder! So.
  Edg. O, matter and impertinency mix'd!
     Reason, in madness!
  Lear. If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
     I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester.
     Thou must be patient. We came crying hither;
     Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air
     We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark.
  Glou. Alack, alack the day!
  Lear. When we are born, we cry that we are come
     To this great stage of fools. This' a good block.
     It were a delicate stratagem to shoe
     A troop of horse with felt. I'll put't in proof,  
     And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law,
     Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!

                 Enter a Gentleman [with Attendants].

  Gent. O, here he is! Lay hand upon him.- Sir,
     Your most dear daughter-
  Lear. No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
     The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;
     You shall have ransom. Let me have a surgeon;
     I am cut to th' brains.
  Gent. You shall have anything.
  Lear. No seconds? All myself?
     Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
     To use his eyes for garden waterpots,
     Ay, and laying autumn's dust.
  Gent. Good sir-
  Lear. I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom. What!
     I will be jovial. Come, come, I am a king;
     My masters, know you that?  
  Gent. You are a royal one, and we obey you.
  Lear. Then there's life in't. Nay, an you get it, you shall get it
     by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa!
                              Exit running. [Attendants follow.]
  Gent. A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
     Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter
     Who redeems nature from the general curse
     Which twain have brought her to.
  Edg. Hail, gentle sir.
  Gent. Sir, speed you. What's your will?
  Edg. Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
  Gent. Most sure and vulgar. Every one hears that
     Which can distinguish sound.
  Edg. But, by your favour,
     How near's the other army?
  Gent. Near and on speedy foot. The main descry
     Stands on the hourly thought.
  Edg. I thank you sir. That's all.
  Gent. Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
     Her army is mov'd on.  
  Edg. I thank you, sir
                                               Exit [Gentleman].
  Glou. You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;
     Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
     To die before you please!
  Edg. Well pray you, father.
  Glou. Now, good sir, what are you?
  Edg. A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows,
     Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
     Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand;
     I'll lead you to some biding.
  Glou. Hearty thanks.
     The bounty and the benison of heaven
     To boot, and boot!

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

  Osw. A proclaim'd prize! Most happy!
     That eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh
     To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,  
     Briefly thyself remember. The sword is out
     That must destroy thee.
  Glou. Now let thy friendly hand
     Put strength enough to't.
                                             [Edgar interposes.]
  Osw. Wherefore, bold peasant,
     Dar'st thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence!
     Lest that th' infection of his fortune take
     Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
  Edg. Chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'cagion.
  Osw. Let go, slave, or thou diest!
  Edg. Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor voke pass. An chud
     ha' bin zwagger'd out of my life, 'twould not ha' bin zo long as
     'tis by a vortnight. Nay, come not near th' old man. Keep out,
     che vore ye, or Ise try whether your costard or my ballow be the
     harder. Chill be plain with you.
  Osw. Out, dunghill!
                                                     They fight.
  Edg. Chill pick your teeth, zir. Come! No matter vor your foins.
                                                 [Oswald falls.]  
  Osw. Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.
     If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
     And give the letters which thou find'st about me
     To Edmund Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out
     Upon the British party. O, untimely death! Death!
                                                        He dies.
  Edg. I know thee well. A serviceable villain,
     As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
     As badness would desire.
  Glou. What, is he dead?
  Edg. Sit you down, father; rest you.
     Let's see his pockets; these letters that he speaks of
     May be my friends. He's dead. I am only sorry
     He had no other deathsman. Let us see.
     Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not.
     To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts;
     Their papers, is more lawful.             Reads the letter.

       'Let our reciprocal vows be rememb'red. You have many
     opportunities to cut him off. If your will want not, time and
     place will be fruitfully offer'd. There is nothing done, if he  
     return the conqueror. Then am I the prisoner, and his bed my
     jail; from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the
     place for your labour.
           'Your (wife, so I would say) affectionate servant,
                                                          'Goneril.'

     O indistinguish'd space of woman's will!
     A plot upon her virtuous husband's life,
     And the exchange my brother! Here in the sands
     Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified
     Of murtherous lechers; and in the mature time
     With this ungracious paper strike the sight
     Of the death-practis'd Duke, For him 'tis well
     That of thy death and business I can tell.
  Glou. The King is mad. How stiff is my vile sense,
     That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
     Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract.
     So should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs,
     And woes by wrong imaginations lose  
     The knowledge of themselves.
                                                A drum afar off.
  Edg. Give me your hand.
     Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.
     Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.        Exeunt.




Scene VII.
A tent in the French camp.

Enter Cordelia, Kent, Doctor, and Gentleman.

  Cor. O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work
     To match thy goodness? My life will be too short
     And every measure fail me.
  Kent. To be acknowledg'd, madam, is o'erpaid.
     All my reports go with the modest truth;
     Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
  Cor. Be better suited.
     These weeds are memories of those worser hours.
     I prithee put them off.
  Kent. Pardon, dear madam.
     Yet to be known shortens my made intent.
     My boon I make it that you know me not
     Till time and I think meet.
  Cor. Then be't so, my good lord. [To the Doctor] How, does the King?
  Doct. Madam, sleeps still.
  Cor. O you kind gods,
     Cure this great breach in his abused nature!  
     Th' untun'd and jarring senses, O, wind up
     Of this child-changed father!
  Doct. So please your Majesty
     That we may wake the King? He hath slept long.
  Cor. Be govern'd by your knowledge, and proceed
     I' th' sway of your own will. Is he array'd?

              Enter Lear in a chair carried by Servants.

  Gent. Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep
     We put fresh garments on him.
  Doct. Be by, good madam, when we do awake him.
     I doubt not of his temperance.
  Cor. Very well.
                                                          Music.
  Doct. Please you draw near. Louder the music there!
  Cor. O my dear father, restoration hang
     Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
     Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
     Have in thy reverence made!  
  Kent. Kind and dear princess!
  Cor. Had you not been their father, these white flakes
     Had challeng'd pity of them. Was this a face
     To be oppos'd against the warring winds?
     To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
     In the most terrible and nimble stroke
     Of quick cross lightning? to watch- poor perdu!-
     With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
     Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
     Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
     To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn,
     In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
     'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
     Had not concluded all.- He wakes. Speak to him.
  Doct. Madam, do you; 'tis fittest.
  Cor. How does my royal lord? How fares your Majesty?
  Lear. You do me wrong to take me out o' th' grave.
     Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
     Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
     Do scald like molten lead.  
  Cor. Sir, do you know me?
  Lear. You are a spirit, I know. When did you die?
  Cor. Still, still, far wide!
  Doct. He's scarce awake. Let him alone awhile.
  Lear. Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight,
     I am mightily abus'd. I should e'en die with pity,
     To see another thus. I know not what to say.
     I will not swear these are my hands. Let's see.
     I feel this pin prick. Would I were assur'd
     Of my condition!
  Cor. O, look upon me, sir,
     And hold your hands in benediction o'er me.
     No, sir, you must not kneel.
  Lear. Pray, do not mock me.
     I am a very foolish fond old man,
     Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;
     And, to deal plainly,
     I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
     Methinks I should know you, and know this man;
     Yet I am doubtful; for I am mainly ignorant  
     What place this is; and all the skill I have
     Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
     Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;
     For (as I am a man) I think this lady
     To be my child Cordelia.
  Cor. And so I am! I am!
  Lear. Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray weep not.
     If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
     I know you do not love me; for your sisters
     Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.
     You have some cause, they have not.
  Cor. No cause, no cause.
  Lear. Am I in France?
  Kent. In your own kingdom, sir.
  Lear. Do not abuse me.
  Doct. Be comforted, good madam. The great rage
     You see is kill'd in him; and yet it is danger
     To make him even o'er the time he has lost.
     Desire him to go in. Trouble him no more
     Till further settling.  
  Cor. Will't please your Highness walk?
  Lear. You must bear with me.
     Pray you now, forget and forgive. I am old and foolish.
                              Exeunt. Manent Kent and Gentleman.
  Gent. Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
  Kent. Most certain, sir.
  Gent. Who is conductor of his people?
  Kent. As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
  Gent. They say Edgar, his banish'd son, is with the Earl of Kent
     in Germany.
  Kent. Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about; the powers of
     the kingdom approach apace.
  Gent. The arbitrement is like to be bloody.
     Fare you well, sir.                                 [Exit.]
  Kent. My point and period will be throughly wrought,
     Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.        Exit.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. Scene I.
The British camp near Dover.

Enter, with Drum and Colours, Edmund, Regan, Gentleman, and Soldiers.

  Edm. Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
     Or whether since he is advis'd by aught
     To change the course. He's full of alteration
     And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.
                                              [Exit an Officer.]
  Reg. Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
  Edm. Tis to be doubted, madam.
  Reg. Now, sweet lord,
     You know the goodness I intend upon you.
     Tell me- but truly- but then speak the truth-
     Do you not love my sister?
  Edm. In honour'd love.
  Reg. But have you never found my brother's way
     To the forfended place?
  Edm. That thought abuses you.
  Reg. I am doubtful that you have been conjunct  
     And bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers.
  Edm. No, by mine honour, madam.
  Reg. I never shall endure her. Dear my lord,
     Be not familiar with her.
  Edm. Fear me not.
     She and the Duke her husband!

       Enter, with Drum and Colours, Albany, Goneril, Soldiers.

  Gon. [aside] I had rather lose the battle than that sister
     Should loosen him and me.
  Alb. Our very loving sister, well bemet.
     Sir, this I hear: the King is come to his daughter,
     With others whom the rigour of our state
     Forc'd to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
     I never yet was valiant. For this business,
     It toucheth us as France invades our land,
     Not bolds the King, with others whom, I fear,
     Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
  Edm. Sir, you speak nobly.  
  Reg. Why is this reason'd?
  Gon. Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
     For these domestic and particular broils
     Are not the question here.
  Alb. Let's then determine
     With th' ancient of war on our proceeding.
  Edm. I shall attend you presently at your tent.
  Reg. Sister, you'll go with us?
  Gon. No.
  Reg. 'Tis most convenient. Pray you go with us.
  Gon. [aside] O, ho, I know the riddle.- I will go.

          [As they are going out,] enter Edgar [disguised].

  Edg. If e'er your Grace had speech with man so poor,
     Hear me one word.
  Alb. I'll overtake you.- Speak.
                              Exeunt [all but Albany and Edgar].
  Edg. Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
     If you have victory, let the trumpet sound  
     For him that brought it. Wretched though I seem,
     I can produce a champion that will prove
     What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
     Your business of the world hath so an end,
     And machination ceases. Fortune love you!
  Alb. Stay till I have read the letter.
  Edg. I was forbid it.
     When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
     And I'll appear again.
  Alb. Why, fare thee well. I will o'erlook thy paper.
                                                   Exit [Edgar].

                            Enter Edmund.

  Edm. The enemy 's in view; draw up your powers.
     Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
     By diligent discovery; but your haste
     Is now urg'd on you.
  Alb. We will greet the time.                             Exit.
  Edm. To both these sisters have I sworn my love;  
     Each jealous of the other, as the stung
     Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
     Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd,
     If both remain alive. To take the widow
     Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;
     And hardly shall I carry out my side,
     Her husband being alive. Now then, we'll use
     His countenance for the battle, which being done,
     Let her who would be rid of him devise
     His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
     Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia-
     The battle done, and they within our power,
     Shall never see his pardon; for my state
     Stands on me to defend, not to debate.                Exit.




Scene II.
A field between the two camps.

Alarum within. Enter, with Drum and Colours, the Powers of France
over the stage, Cordelia with her Father in her hand, and exeunt.

Enter Edgar and Gloucester.

  Edg. Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
     For your good host. Pray that the right may thrive.
     If ever I return to you again,
     I'll bring you comfort.
  Glou. Grace go with you, sir!
                                                   Exit [Edgar].

               Alarum and retreat within. Enter Edgar,

  Edg. Away, old man! give me thy hand! away!
     King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.
     Give me thy hand! come on!
  Glou. No further, sir. A man may rot even here.  
  Edg. What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
     Their going hence, even as their coming hither;
     Ripeness is all. Come on.
  Glou. And that's true too.                             Exeunt.




Scene III.
The British camp, near Dover.

Enter, in conquest, with Drum and Colours, Edmund; Lear and Cordelia
as prisoners; Soldiers, Captain.

  Edm. Some officers take them away. Good guard
     Until their greater pleasures first be known
     That are to censure them.
  Cor. We are not the first
     Who with best meaning have incurr'd the worst.
     For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;
     Myself could else outfrown false Fortune's frown.
     Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
  Lear. No, no, no, no! Come, let's away to prison.
     We two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage.
     When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down
     And ask of thee forgiveness. So we'll live,
     And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
     At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
     Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too-
     Who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out-  
     And take upon 's the mystery of things,
     As if we were God's spies; and we'll wear out,
     In a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones
     That ebb and flow by th' moon.
  Edm. Take them away.
  Lear. Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
     The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
     He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven
     And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes.
     The goodyears shall devour 'em, flesh and fell,
     Ere they shall make us weep! We'll see 'em starv'd first.
     Come.                  Exeunt [Lear and Cordelia, guarded].
  Edm. Come hither, Captain; hark.
     Take thou this note [gives a paper]. Go follow them to prison.
     One step I have advanc'd thee. If thou dost
     As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
     To noble fortunes. Know thou this, that men
     Are as the time is. To be tender-minded
     Does not become a sword. Thy great employment
     Will not bear question. Either say thou'lt do't,  
     Or thrive by other means.
  Capt. I'll do't, my lord.
  Edm. About it! and write happy when th' hast done.
     Mark- I say, instantly; and carry it so
     As I have set it down.
  Capt. I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;
     If it be man's work, I'll do't.                       Exit.

          Flourish. Enter Albany, Goneril, Regan, Soldiers.

  Alb. Sir, you have show'd to-day your valiant strain,
     And fortune led you well. You have the captives
     Who were the opposites of this day's strife.
     We do require them of you, so to use them
     As we shall find their merits and our safety
     May equally determine.
  Edm. Sir, I thought it fit
     To send the old and miserable King
     To some retention and appointed guard;
     Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,  
     To pluck the common bosom on his side
     And turn our impress'd lances in our eyes
     Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen,
     My reason all the same; and they are ready
     To-morrow, or at further space, t' appear
     Where you shall hold your session. At this time
     We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
     And the best quarrels, in the heat, are curs'd
     By those that feel their sharpness.
     The question of Cordelia and her father
     Requires a fitter place.
  Alb. Sir, by your patience,
     I hold you but a subject of this war,
     Not as a brother.
  Reg. That's as we list to grace him.
     Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded
     Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers,
     Bore the commission of my place and person,
     The which immediacy may well stand up
     And call itself your brother.  
  Gon. Not so hot!
     In his own grace he doth exalt himself
     More than in your addition.
  Reg. In my rights
     By me invested, he compeers the best.
  Gon. That were the most if he should husband you.
  Reg. Jesters do oft prove prophets.
  Gon. Holla, holla!
     That eye that told you so look'd but asquint.
  Reg. Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
     From a full-flowing stomach. General,
     Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
     Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine.
     Witness the world that I create thee here
     My lord and master.
  Gon. Mean you to enjoy him?
  Alb. The let-alone lies not in your good will.
  Edm. Nor in thine, lord.
  Alb. Half-blooded fellow, yes.
  Reg. [to Edmund] Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.  
  Alb. Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
     On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
     This gilded serpent [points to Goneril]. For your claim, fair
        sister,
     I bar it in the interest of my wife.
     'Tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
     And I, her husband, contradict your banes.
     If you will marry, make your loves to me;
     My lady is bespoke.
  Gon. An interlude!
  Alb. Thou art arm'd, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound.
     If none appear to prove upon thy person
     Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
     There is my pledge [throws down a glove]! I'll prove it on thy
        heart,
     Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
     Than I have here proclaim'd thee.
  Reg. Sick, O, sick!
  Gon. [aside] If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.
  Edm. There's my exchange [throws down a glove]. What in the world  
        he is
     That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.
     Call by thy trumpet. He that dares approach,
     On him, on you, who not? I will maintain
     My truth and honour firmly.
  Alb. A herald, ho!
  Edm. A herald, ho, a herald!
  Alb. Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
     All levied in my name, have in my name
     Took their discharge.
  Reg. My sickness grows upon me.
  Alb. She is not well. Convey her to my tent.
                                              [Exit Regan, led.]

                           Enter a Herald.

     Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,
     And read out this.
  Capt. Sound, trumpet!                        A trumpet sounds.
  
  Her. (reads) 'If any man of quality or degree within the lists of
     the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester,
     that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound
     of the trumpet. He is bold in his defence.'

  Edm. Sound!                                     First trumpet.
  Her. Again!                                    Second trumpet.
  Her. Again!                                     Third trumpet.
                                         Trumpet answers within.

    Enter Edgar, armed, at the third sound, a Trumpet before him.

  Alb. Ask him his purposes, why he appears
     Upon this call o' th' trumpet.
  Her. What are you?
     Your name, your quality? and why you answer
     This present summons?
  Edg. Know my name is lost;
     By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
     Yet am I noble as the adversary  
     I come to cope.
  Alb. Which is that adversary?
  Edg. What's he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?
  Edm. Himself. What say'st thou to him?
  Edg. Draw thy sword,
     That, if my speech offend a noble heart,
     Thy arm may do thee justice. Here is mine.
     Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
     My oath, and my profession. I protest-
     Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
     Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
     Thy valour and thy heart- thou art a traitor;
     False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
     Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince;
     And from th' extremest upward of thy head
     To the descent and dust beneath thy foot,
     A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou 'no,'
     This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
     To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
     Thou liest.  
  Edm. In wisdom I should ask thy name;
     But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
     And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
     What safe and nicely I might well delay
     By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
     Back do I toss those treasons to thy head;
     With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;
     Which- for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise-
     This sword of mine shall give them instant way
     Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!
                                 Alarums. Fight. [Edmund falls.]
  Alb. Save him, save him!
  Gon. This is mere practice, Gloucester.
     By th' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
     An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquish'd,
     But cozen'd and beguil'd.
  Alb. Shut your mouth, dame,
     Or with this paper shall I stop it. [Shows her her letter to
     Edmund.]- [To Edmund]. Hold, sir.
     [To Goneril] Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.  
     No tearing, lady! I perceive you know it.
  Gon. Say if I do- the laws are mine, not thine.
     Who can arraign me for't?
  Alb. Most monstrous!
     Know'st thou this paper?
  Gon. Ask me not what I know.                             Exit.
  Alb. Go after her. She's desperate; govern her.
                                              [Exit an Officer.]
  Edm. What, you have charg'd me with, that have I done,
     And more, much more. The time will bring it out.
     'Tis past, and so am I.- But what art thou
     That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble,
     I do forgive thee.
  Edg. Let's exchange charity.
     I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
     If more, the more th' hast wrong'd me.
     My name is Edgar and thy father's son.
     The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
     Make instruments to scourge us.
     The dark and vicious place where thee he got  
     Cost him his eyes.
  Edm. Th' hast spoken right; 'tis true.
     The wheel is come full circle; I am here.
  Alb. Methought thy very gait did prophesy
     A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.
     Let sorrow split my heart if ever I
     Did hate thee, or thy father!
  Edg. Worthy prince, I know't.
  Alb. Where have you hid yourself?
     How have you known the miseries of your father?
  Edg. By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
     And when 'tis told, O that my heart would burst!
     The bloody proclamation to escape
     That follow'd me so near (O, our lives' sweetness!
     That with the pain of death would hourly die
     Rather than die at once!) taught me to shift
     Into a madman's rags, t' assume a semblance
     That very dogs disdain'd; and in this habit
     Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
     Their precious stones new lost; became his guide,  
     Led him, begg'd for him, sav'd him from despair;
     Never (O fault!) reveal'd myself unto him
     Until some half hour past, when I was arm'd,
     Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
     I ask'd his blessing, and from first to last
     Told him my pilgrimage. But his flaw'd heart
     (Alack, too weak the conflict to support!)
     'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
     Burst smilingly.
  Edm. This speech of yours hath mov'd me,
     And shall perchance do good; but speak you on;
     You look as you had something more to say.
  Alb. If there be more, more woful, hold it in;
     For I am almost ready to dissolve,
     Hearing of this.
  Edg. This would have seem'd a period
     To such as love not sorrow; but another,
     To amplify too much, would make much more,
     And top extremity.
     Whilst I was big in clamour, came there a man,  
     Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
     Shunn'd my abhorr'd society; but then, finding
     Who 'twas that so endur'd, with his strong arms
     He fastened on my neck, and bellowed out
     As he'd burst heaven; threw him on my father;
     Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
     That ever ear receiv'd; which in recounting
     His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
     Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,
     And there I left him tranc'd.
  Alb. But who was this?
  Edg. Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent; who in disguise
     Followed his enemy king and did him service
     Improper for a slave.

                Enter a Gentleman with a bloody knife.

  Gent. Help, help! O, help!
  Edg. What kind of help?
  Alb. Speak, man.  
  Edg. What means that bloody knife?
  Gent. 'Tis hot, it smokes.
     It came even from the heart of- O! she's dead!
  Alb. Who dead? Speak, man.
  Gent. Your lady, sir, your lady! and her sister
     By her is poisoned; she hath confess'd it.
  Edm. I was contracted to them both. All three
     Now marry in an instant.

                             Enter Kent.

  Edg. Here comes Kent.
  Alb. Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
                                               [Exit Gentleman.]
     This judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble
     Touches us not with pity. O, is this he?
     The time will not allow the compliment
     That very manners urges.
  Kent. I am come
     To bid my king and master aye good night.  
     Is he not here?
  Alb. Great thing of us forgot!
     Speak, Edmund, where's the King? and where's Cordelia?
                 The bodies of Goneril and Regan are brought in.
     Seest thou this object, Kent?
  Kent. Alack, why thus?
  Edm. Yet Edmund was belov'd.
     The one the other poisoned for my sake,
     And after slew herself.
  Alb. Even so. Cover their faces.
  Edm. I pant for life. Some good I mean to do,
     Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send
     (Be brief in't) to the castle; for my writ
     Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia.
     Nay, send in time.
  Alb. Run, run, O, run!
  Edg. To who, my lord? Who has the office? Send
     Thy token of reprieve.
  Edm. Well thought on. Take my sword;
     Give it the Captain.  
  Alb. Haste thee for thy life.                    [Exit Edgar.]
  Edm. He hath commission from thy wife and me
     To hang Cordelia in the prison and
     To lay the blame upon her own despair
     That she fordid herself.
  Alb. The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
                                          [Edmund is borne off.]

    Enter Lear, with Cordelia [dead] in his arms, [Edgar, Captain,
                        and others following].

  Lear. Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stone.
     Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
     That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone for ever!
     I know when one is dead, and when one lives.
     She's dead as earth. Lend me a looking glass.
     If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
     Why, then she lives.
  Kent. Is this the promis'd end?
  Edg. Or image of that horror?  
  Alb. Fall and cease!
  Lear. This feather stirs; she lives! If it be so,
     It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
     That ever I have felt.
  Kent. O my good master!
  Lear. Prithee away!
  Edg. 'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
  Lear. A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
     I might have sav'd her; now she's gone for ever!
     Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!
     What is't thou say'st, Her voice was ever soft,
     Gentle, and low- an excellent thing in woman.
     I kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
  Capt. 'Tis true, my lords, he did.
  Lear. Did I not, fellow?
     I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
     I would have made them skip. I am old now,
     And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
     Mine eyes are not o' th' best. I'll tell you straight.
  Kent. If fortune brag of two she lov'd and hated,  
     One of them we behold.
  Lear. This' a dull sight. Are you not Kent?
  Kent. The same-
     Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?
  Lear. He's a good fellow, I can tell you that.
     He'll strike, and quickly too. He's dead and rotten.
  Kent. No, my good lord; I am the very man-
  Lear. I'll see that straight.
  Kent. That from your first of difference and decay
     Have followed your sad steps.
  Lear. You're welcome hither.
  Kent. Nor no man else! All's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
     Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
     And desperately are dead.
  Lear. Ay, so I think.
  Alb. He knows not what he says; and vain is it
     That we present us to him.
  Edg. Very bootless.

                           Enter a Captain.  

  Capt. Edmund is dead, my lord.
  Alb. That's but a trifle here.
     You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
     What comfort to this great decay may come
     Shall be applied. For us, we will resign,
     During the life of this old Majesty,
     To him our absolute power; [to Edgar and Kent] you to your
        rights;
     With boot, and Such addition as your honours
     Have more than merited.- All friends shall taste
     The wages of their virtue, and all foes
     The cup of their deservings.- O, see, see!
  Lear. And my poor fool is hang'd! No, no, no life!
     Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
     And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,
     Never, never, never, never, never!
     Pray you undo this button. Thank you, sir.
     Do you see this? Look on her! look! her lips!
     Look there, look there!                            He dies.  
  Edg. He faints! My lord, my lord!
  Kent. Break, heart; I prithee break!
  Edg. Look up, my lord.
  Kent. Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass! He hates him
     That would upon the rack of this tough world
     Stretch him out longer.
  Edg. He is gone indeed.
  Kent. The wonder is, he hath endur'd so long.
     He but usurp'd his life.
  Alb. Bear them from hence. Our present business
     Is general woe. [To Kent and Edgar] Friends of my soul, you
        twain
     Rule in this realm, and the gor'd state sustain.
  Kent. I have a journey, sir, shortly to go.
     My master calls me; I must not say no.
  Alb. The weight of this sad time we must obey,
     Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
     The oldest have borne most; we that are young
     Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
                                       Exeunt with a dead march.


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>






1595

LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae.

  FERDINAND, King of Navarre
  BEROWNE,    lord attending on the King
  LONGAVILLE,  "      "      "   "   "
  DUMAIN,      "      "      "   "   "
  BOYET,   lord attending on the Princess of France
  MARCADE,   "     "       "  "     "      "    "
  DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, fantastical Spaniard
  SIR NATHANIEL, a curate
  HOLOFERNES, a schoolmaster
  DULL, a constable
  COSTARD, a clown
  MOTH, page to Armado
  A FORESTER

  THE PRINCESS OF FRANCE
  ROSALINE, lady attending on the Princess
  MARIA,      "     "       "  "     "
  KATHARINE, lady attending on the Princess
  JAQUENETTA, a country wench
  
  Lords, Attendants, etc.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Navarre


ACT I. SCENE I.
Navarre. The King's park

Enter the King, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN

  KING. Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
    Live regist'red upon our brazen tombs,
    And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
    When, spite of cormorant devouring Time,
    Th' endeavour of this present breath may buy
    That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge,
    And make us heirs of all eternity.
    Therefore, brave conquerors- for so you are
    That war against your own affections
    And the huge army of the world's desires-
    Our late edict shall strongly stand in force:
    Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
    Our court shall be a little Academe,
    Still and contemplative in living art.
    You three, Berowne, Dumain, and Longaville,
    Have sworn for three years' term to live with me
    My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes  
    That are recorded in this schedule here.
    Your oaths are pass'd; and now subscribe your names,
    That his own hand may strike his honour down
    That violates the smallest branch herein.
    If you are arm'd to do as sworn to do,
    Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
  LONGAVILLE. I am resolv'd; 'tis but a three years' fast.
    The mind shall banquet, though the body pine.
    Fat paunches have lean pates; and dainty bits
    Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
  DUMAIN. My loving lord, Dumain is mortified.
    The grosser manner of these world's delights
    He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves;
    To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die,
    With all these living in philosophy.
  BEROWNE. I can but say their protestation over;
    So much, dear liege, I have already sworn,
    That is, to live and study here three years.
    But there are other strict observances,
    As: not to see a woman in that term,  
    Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
    And one day in a week to touch no food,
    And but one meal on every day beside,
    The which I hope is not enrolled there;
    And then to sleep but three hours in the night
    And not be seen to wink of all the day-
    When I was wont to think no harm all night,
    And make a dark night too of half the day-
    Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
    O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
    Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep!
  KING. Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these.
  BEROWNE. Let me say no, my liege, an if you please:
    I only swore to study with your Grace,
    And stay here in your court for three years' space.
  LONGAVILLE. You swore to that, Berowne, and to the rest.
  BEROWNE. By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
    What is the end of study, let me know.
  KING. Why, that to know which else we should not know.
  BEROWNE. Things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense?  
  KING. Ay, that is study's god-like recompense.
  BEROWNE. Come on, then; I will swear to study so,
    To know the thing I am forbid to know,
    As thus: to study where I well may dine,
    When I to feast expressly am forbid;
    Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
    When mistresses from common sense are hid;
    Or, having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath,
    Study to break it, and not break my troth.
    If study's gain be thus, and this be so,
    Study knows that which yet it doth not know.
    Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
  KING. These be the stops that hinder study quite,
    And train our intellects to vain delight.
  BEROWNE. Why, all delights are vain; but that most vain
    Which, with pain purchas'd, doth inherit pain,
    As painfully to pore upon a book
    To seek the light of truth; while truth the while
    Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look.
    Light, seeking light, doth light of light beguile;  
    So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
    Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
    Study me how to please the eye indeed,
    By fixing it upon a fairer eye;
    Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed,
    And give him light that it was blinded by.
    Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
    That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks;
    Small have continual plodders ever won,
    Save base authority from others' books.
    These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights
    That give a name to every fixed star
    Have no more profit of their shining nights
    Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
    Too much to know is to know nought but fame;
    And every godfather can give a name.
  KING. How well he's read, to reason against reading!
  DUMAIN. Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!
  LONGAVILLE. He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.
  BEROWNE. The spring is near, when green geese are a-breeding.  
  DUMAIN. How follows that?
  BEROWNE. Fit in his place and time.
  DUMAIN. In reason nothing.
  BEROWNE. Something then in rhyme.
  LONGAVILLE. Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost
    That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
  BEROWNE. Well, say I am; why should proud summer boast
    Before the birds have any cause to sing?
    Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
    At Christmas I no more desire a rose
    Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows;
    But like of each thing that in season grows;
    So you, to study now it is too late,
    Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
  KING. Well, sit out; go home, Berowne; adieu.
  BEROWNE. No, my good lord; I have sworn to stay with you;
    And though I have for barbarism spoke more
    Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
    Yet confident I'll keep what I have swore,
    And bide the penance of each three years' day.  
    Give me the paper; let me read the same;
    And to the strictest decrees I'll write my name.
  KING. How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
  BEROWNE. [Reads] 'Item. That no woman shall come within a mile of
    my court'- Hath this been proclaimed?
  LONGAVILLE. Four days ago.
  BEROWNE. Let's see the penalty. [Reads] '-on pain of losing her
    tongue.' Who devis'd this penalty?
  LONGAVILLE. Marry, that did I.
  BEROWNE. Sweet lord, and why?
  LONGAVILLE. To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
  BEROWNE. A dangerous law against gentility.
    [Reads] 'Item. If any man be seen to talk with a woman within
    the term of three years, he shall endure such public shame as the
    rest of the court can possibly devise.'
    This article, my liege, yourself must break;
    For well you know here comes in embassy
    The French king's daughter, with yourself to speak-
    A mild of grace and complete majesty-
    About surrender up of Aquitaine  
    To her decrepit, sick, and bedrid father;
    Therefore this article is made in vain,
    Or vainly comes th' admired princess hither.
  KING. What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.
  BEROWNE. So study evermore is over-shot.
    While it doth study to have what it would,
    It doth forget to do the thing it should;
    And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
    'Tis won as towns with fire- so won, so lost.
  KING. We must of force dispense with this decree;
    She must lie here on mere necessity.
  BEROWNE. Necessity will make us all forsworn
    Three thousand times within this three years' space;
    For every man with his affects is born,
    Not by might mast'red, but by special grace.
    If I break faith, this word shall speak for me:
    I am forsworn on mere necessity.
    So to the laws at large I write my name;        [Subscribes]
    And he that breaks them in the least degree
    Stands in attainder of eternal shame.  
    Suggestions are to other as to me;
    But I believe, although I seem so loath,
    I am the last that will last keep his oath.
    But is there no quick recreation granted?
  KING. Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
    With a refined traveller of Spain,
    A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
    That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
    One who the music of his own vain tongue
    Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;
    A man of complements, whom right and wrong
    Have chose as umpire of their mutiny.
    This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
    For interim to our studies shall relate,
    In high-born words, the worth of many a knight
    From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate.
    How you delight, my lords, I know not, I;
    But I protest I love to hear him lie,
    And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
  BEROWNE. Armado is a most illustrious wight,  
    A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
  LONGAVILLE. Costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
    And so to study three years is but short.

      Enter DULL, a constable, with a letter, and COSTARD

  DULL. Which is the Duke's own person?
  BEROWNE. This, fellow. What wouldst?
  DULL. I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his Grace's
    farborough; but I would see his own person in flesh and blood.
  BEROWNE. This is he.
  DULL. Signior Arme- Arme- commends you. There's villainy abroad;
    this letter will tell you more.
  COSTARD. Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
  KING. A letter from the magnificent Armado.
  BEROWNE. How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
  LONGAVILLE. A high hope for a low heaven. God grant us patience!
  BEROWNE. To hear, or forbear hearing?
  LONGAVILLE. To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or, to
    forbear both.  
  BEROWNE. Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to climb
    in the merriness.
  COSTARD. The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
    The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
  BEROWNE. In what manner?
  COSTARD. In manner and form following, sir; all those three: I was
    seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the form,
    and taken following her into the park; which, put together, is in
    manner and form following. Now, sir, for the manner- it is the
    manner of a man to speak to a woman. For the form- in some form.
  BEROWNE. For the following, sir?
  COSTARD. As it shall follow in my correction; and God defend the
    right!
  KING. Will you hear this letter with attention?
  BEROWNE. As we would hear an oracle.
  COSTARD. Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
  KING. [Reads] 'Great deputy, the welkin's vicegerent and sole
    dominator of Navarre, my soul's earth's god and body's fost'ring
    patron'-
  COSTARD. Not a word of Costard yet.  
  KING. [Reads] 'So it is'-
  COSTARD. It may be so; but if he say it is so, he is, in telling
    true, but so.
  KING. Peace!
  COSTARD. Be to me, and every man that dares not fight!
  KING. No words!
  COSTARD. Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
  KING. [Reads] 'So it is, besieged with sable-coloured melancholy, I
    did commend the black oppressing humour to the most wholesome
    physic of thy health-giving air; and, as I am a gentleman, betook
    myself to walk. The time When? About the sixth hour; when beasts
    most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment
    which is called supper. So much for the time When. Now for the
    ground Which? which, I mean, I upon; it is ycleped thy park. Then
    for the place Where? where, I mean, I did encounter that obscene
    and most prepost'rous event that draweth from my snow-white pen
    the ebon-coloured ink which here thou viewest, beholdest,
    surveyest, or seest. But to the place Where? It standeth
    north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy
    curious-knotted garden. There did I see that low-spirited swain,  
    that base minnow of thy mirth,'
  COSTARD. Me?
  KING. 'that unlettered small-knowing soul,'
  COSTARD. Me?
  KING. 'that shallow vassal,'
  COSTARD. Still me?
  KING. 'which, as I remember, hight Costard,'
  COSTARD. O, me!
  KING. 'sorted and consorted, contrary to thy established proclaimed
    edict and continent canon; which, with, O, with- but with this I
    passion to say wherewith-'
  COSTARD. With a wench.
    King. 'with a child of our grandmother Eve, a female; or, for thy
    more sweet understanding, a woman. Him I, as my ever-esteemed
    duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
    punishment, by thy sweet Grace's officer, Antony Dull, a man of
    good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation.'
  DULL. Me, an't shall please you; I am Antony Dull.
  KING. 'For Jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel called, which I
    apprehended with the aforesaid swain- I keep her as a vessel of  
    thy law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice,
    bring her to trial. Thine, in all compliments of devoted and
    heart-burning heat of duty,
                                         DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'

  BEROWNE. This is not so well as I look'd for, but the best that
    ever I heard.
  KING. Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say you to
    this?
  COSTARD. Sir, I confess the wench.
  KING. Did you hear the proclamation?
  COSTARD. I do confess much of the hearing it, but little of the
    marking of it.
  KING. It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment to be taken with a
    wench.
  COSTARD. I was taken with none, sir; I was taken with a damsel.
  KING. Well, it was proclaimed damsel.
  COSTARD. This was no damsel neither, sir; she was a virgin.
  KING. It is so varied too, for it was proclaimed virgin.
  COSTARD. If it were, I deny her virginity; I was taken with a maid.  
  KING. This 'maid' not serve your turn, sir.
  COSTARD. This maid will serve my turn, sir.
  KING. Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast a week
    with bran and water.
  COSTARD. I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
  KING. And Don Armado shall be your keeper.
    My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o'er;
    And go we, lords, to put in practice that
    Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
                             Exeunt KING, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN
  BEROWNE. I'll lay my head to any good man's hat
    These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
    Sirrah, come on.
  COSTARD. I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is I was taken
    with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true girl; and therefore
    welcome the sour cup of prosperity! Affliction may one day smile
    again; and till then, sit thee down, sorrow.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.
The park

Enter ARMADO and MOTH, his page

  ARMADO. Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows
    melancholy?
  MOTH. A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
  ARMADO. Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
  MOTH. No, no; O Lord, sir, no!
  ARMADO. How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my tender
    juvenal?
  MOTH. By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signior.
  ARMADO. Why tough signior? Why tough signior?
  MOTH. Why tender juvenal? Why tender juvenal?
  ARMADO. I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton
    appertaining to thy young days, which we may nominate tender.
  MOTH. And I, tough signior, as an appertinent title to your old
    time, which we may name tough.
  ARMADO. Pretty and apt.
  MOTH. How mean you, sir? I pretty, and my saying apt? or I apt, and
    my saying pretty?  
  ARMADO. Thou pretty, because little.
  MOTH. Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?
  ARMADO. And therefore apt, because quick.
  MOTH. Speak you this in my praise, master?
  ARMADO. In thy condign praise.
  MOTH. I will praise an eel with the same praise.
  ARMADO. that an eel is ingenious?
  MOTH. That an eel is quick.
  ARMADO. I do say thou art quick in answers; thou heat'st my blood.
  MOTH. I am answer'd, sir.
  ARMADO. I love not to be cross'd.
  MOTH. [Aside] He speaks the mere contrary: crosses love not him.
  ARMADO. I have promised to study three years with the Duke.
  MOTH. You may do it in an hour, sir.
  ARMADO. Impossible.
  MOTH. How many is one thrice told?
  ARMADO. I am ill at reck'ning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
  MOTH. You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.
  ARMADO. I confess both; they are both the varnish of a complete
    man.  
  MOTH. Then I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace
    amounts to.
  ARMADO. It doth amount to one more than two.
  MOTH. Which the base vulgar do call three.
  ARMADO. True.
  MOTH. Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here is three
    studied ere ye'll thrice wink; and how easy it is to put 'years'
    to the word 'three,' and study three years in two words, the
    dancing horse will tell you.
  ARMADO. A most fine figure!
  MOTH. [Aside] To prove you a cipher.
  ARMADO. I will hereupon confess I am in love. And as it is base for
    a soldier to love, so am I in love with a base wench. If drawing
    my sword against the humour of affection would deliver me from
    the reprobate thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and
    ransom him to any French courtier for a new-devis'd curtsy. I
    think scorn to sigh; methinks I should out-swear Cupid. Comfort
    me, boy; what great men have been in love?
  MOTH. Hercules, master.
  ARMADO. Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name more;  
    and, sweet my child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.
  MOTH. Samson, master; he was a man of good carriage, great
    carriage, for he carried the town gates on his back like a
    porter; and he was in love.
  ARMADO. O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee
    in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carrying gates. I am in
    love too. Who was Samson's love, my dear Moth?
  MOTH. A woman, master.
  ARMADO. Of what complexion?
  MOTH. Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the
    four.
  ARMADO. Tell me precisely of what complexion.
  MOTH. Of the sea-water green, sir.
  ARMADO. Is that one of the four complexions?
  MOTH. As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.
  ARMADO. Green, indeed, is the colour of lovers; but to have a love
    of that colour, methinks Samson had small reason for it. He
    surely affected her for her wit.
  MOTH. It was so, sir; for she had a green wit.
  ARMADO. My love is most immaculate white and red.  
  MOTH. Most maculate thoughts, master, are mask'd under such
    colours.
  ARMADO. Define, define, well-educated infant.
  MOTH. My father's wit my mother's tongue assist me!
  ARMADO. Sweet invocation of a child; most pretty, and pathetical!
  MOTH.      If she be made of white and red,
               Her faults will ne'er be known;
             For blushing cheeks by faults are bred,
               And fears by pale white shown.
             Then if she fear, or be to blame,
               By this you shall not know;
             For still her cheeks possess the same
               Which native she doth owe.
    A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.
  ARMADO. Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
  MOTH. The world was very guilty of such a ballad some three ages
    since; but I think now 'tis not to be found; or if it were, it
    would neither serve for the writing nor the tune.
  ARMADO. I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may
    example my digression by some mighty precedent. Boy, I do love  
    that country girl that I took in the park with the rational hind
    Costard; she deserves well.
  MOTH. [Aside] To be whipt; and yet a better love than my master.
  ARMADO. Sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
  MOTH. And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
  ARMADO. I say, sing.
  MOTH. Forbear till this company be past.

                Enter DULL, COSTARD, and JAQUENETTA

  DULL. Sir, the Duke's pleasure is that you keep Costard safe; and
    you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penance; but 'a
    must fast three days a week. For this damsel, I must keep her at
    the park; she is allow'd for the day-woman. Fare you well.
  ARMADO. I do betray myself with blushing. Maid!
  JAQUENETTA. Man!
  ARMADO. I will visit thee at the lodge.
  JAQUENETTA. That's hereby.
  ARMADO. I know where it is situate.
  JAQUENETTA. Lord, how wise you are!  
  ARMADO. I will tell thee wonders.
  JAQUENETTA. With that face?
  ARMADO. I love thee.
  JAQUENETTA. So I heard you say.
  ARMADO. And so, farewell.
  JAQUENETTA. Fair weather after you!
  DULL. Come, Jaquenetta, away.             Exit with JAQUENETTA
  ARMADO. Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be
    pardoned.
  COSTARD. Well, sir, I hope when I do it I shall do it on a full
    stomach.
  ARMADO. Thou shalt be heavily punished.
  COSTARD. I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are but
    lightly rewarded.
  ARMADO. Take away this villain; shut him up.
  MOTH. Come, you transgressing slave, away.
  COSTARD. Let me not be pent up, sir; I will fast, being loose.
  MOTH. No, sir; that were fast, and loose. Thou shalt to prison.
  COSTARD. Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I
    have seen, some shall see.  
  MOTH. What shall some see?
  COSTARD. Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon. It is
    not for prisoners to be too silent in their words, and therefore
    I will say nothing. I thank God I have as little patience as
    another man, and therefore I can be quiet.
                                         Exeunt MOTH and COSTARD
  ARMADO. I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her shoe,
    which is baser, guided by her foot, which is basest, doth tread.
    I shall be forsworn- which is a great argument of falsehood- if I
    love. And how can that be true love which is falsely attempted?
    Love is a familiar; Love is a devil. There is no evil angel but
    Love. Yet was Samson so tempted, and he had an excellent
    strength; yet was Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.
    Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club, and therefore
    too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier. The first and second cause
    will not serve my turn; the passado he respects not, the duello
    he regards not; his disgrace is to be called boy, but his glory
    is to subdue men. Adieu, valour; rust, rapier; be still, drum;
    for your manager is in love; yea, he loveth. Assist me, some
    extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn sonnet.  
    Devise, wit; write, pen; for I am for whole volumes in folio.
 Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE II.
The park

Enter the PRINCESS OF FRANCE, with three attending ladies,
ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, and two other LORDS

  BOYET. Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.
    Consider who the King your father sends,
    To whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
    Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
    To parley with the sole inheritor
    Of all perfections that a man may owe,
    Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
    Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
    Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
    As Nature was in making graces dear,
    When she did starve the general world beside
    And prodigally gave them all to you.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
    Needs not the painted flourish of your praise.
    Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
    Not utt'red by base sale of chapmen's tongues;  
    I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
    Than you much willing to be counted wise
    In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
    But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
    You are not ignorant all-telling fame
    Doth noise abroad Navarre hath made a vow,
    Till painful study shall outwear three years,
    No woman may approach his silent court.
    Therefore to's seemeth it a needful course,
    Before we enter his forbidden gates,
    To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
    Bold of your worthiness, we single you
    As our best-moving fair solicitor.
    Tell him the daughter of the King of France,
    On serious business, craving quick dispatch,
    Importunes personal conference with his Grace.
    Haste, signify so much; while we attend,
    Like humble-visag'd suitors, his high will.
  BOYET. Proud of employment, willingly I go.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.  
                                                      Exit BOYET
    Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
    That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
  FIRST LORD. Lord Longaville is one.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Know you the man?
  MARIA. I know him, madam; at a marriage feast,
    Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
    Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized
    In Normandy, saw I this Longaville.
    A man of sovereign parts, peerless esteem'd,
    Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms;
    Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
    The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
    If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
    Is a sharp wit match'd with too blunt a will,
    Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
    It should none spare that come within his power.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Some merry mocking lord, belike; is't so?
  MARIA. They say so most that most his humours know.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Such short-liv'd wits do wither as they grow.  
    Who are the rest?
  KATHARINE. The young Dumain, a well-accomplish'd youth,
    Of all that virtue love for virtue loved;
    Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill,
    For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
    And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
    I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once;
    And much too little of that good I saw
    Is my report to his great worthiness.
  ROSALINE. Another of these students at that time
    Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
    Berowne they call him; but a merrier man,
    Within the limit of becoming mirth,
    I never spent an hour's talk withal.
    His eye begets occasion for his wit,
    For every object that the one doth catch
    The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
    Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
    Delivers in such apt and gracious words
    That aged ears play truant at his tales,  
    And younger hearings are quite ravished;
    So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. God bless my ladies! Are they all in love,
    That every one her own hath garnished
    With such bedecking ornaments of praise?
  FIRST LORD. Here comes Boyet.

                       Re-enter BOYET

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Now, what admittance, lord?
  BOYET. Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
    And he and his competitors in oath
    Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady,
    Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
    He rather means to lodge you in the field,
    Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
    Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
    To let you enter his unpeopled house.
                                    [The LADIES-IN-WAITING mask]
  
             Enter KING, LONGAVILLE, DUMAIN, BEROWNE,
                         and ATTENDANTS

    Here comes Navarre.
  KING. Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. 'Fair' I give you back again; and 'welcome' I
    have not yet. The roof of this court is too high to be yours, and
    welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
  KING. You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I will be welcome then; conduct me thither.
  KING. Hear me, dear lady: I have sworn an oath-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Our Lady help my lord! He'll be forsworn.
  KING. Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Why, will shall break it; will, and nothing
    else.
  KING. Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
    Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
    I hear your Grace hath sworn out house-keeping.
    'Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,  
    And sin to break it.
    But pardon me, I am too sudden bold;
    To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
    Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
    And suddenly resolve me in my suit.         [Giving a paper]
  KING. Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. YOU Will the sooner that I were away,
    For you'll prove perjur'd if you make me stay.
  BEROWNE. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
  KATHARINE. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
  BEROWNE. I know you did.
  KATHARINE. How needless was it then to ask the question!
  BEROWNE. You must not be so quick.
  KATHARINE. 'Tis long of you, that spur me with such questions.
  BEROWNE. Your wit 's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
  KATHARINE. Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
  BEROWNE. What time o' day?
  KATHARINE. The hour that fools should ask.
  BEROWNE. Now fair befall your mask!
  KATHARINE. Fair fall the face it covers!  
  BEROWNE. And send you many lovers!
  KATHARINE. Amen, so you be none.
  BEROWNE. Nay, then will I be gone.
  KING. Madam, your father here doth intimate
    The payment of a hundred thousand crowns;
    Being but the one half of an entire sum
    Disbursed by my father in his wars.
    But say that he or we, as neither have,
    Receiv'd that sum, yet there remains unpaid
    A hundred thousand more, in surety of the which,
    One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
    Although not valued to the money's worth.
    If then the King your father will restore
    But that one half which is unsatisfied,
    We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
    And hold fair friendship with his Majesty.
    But that, it seems, he little purposeth,
    For here he doth demand to have repaid
    A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,
    On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,  
    To have his title live in Aquitaine;
    Which we much rather had depart withal,
    And have the money by our father lent,
    Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.
    Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
    From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
    A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast,
    And go well satisfied to France again.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. You do the King my father too much wrong,
    And wrong the reputation of your name,
    In so unseeming to confess receipt
    Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
  KING. I do protest I never heard of it;
    And, if you prove it, I'll repay it back
    Or yield up Aquitaine.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. We arrest your word.
    Boyet, you can produce acquittances
    For such a sum from special officers
    Of Charles his father.
  KING. Satisfy me so.  
  BOYET. So please your Grace, the packet is not come,
    Where that and other specialties are bound;
    To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
  KING. It shall suffice me; at which interview
    All liberal reason I will yield unto.
    Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
    As honour, without breach of honour, may
    Make tender of to thy true worthiness.
    You may not come, fair Princess, within my gates;
    But here without you shall be so receiv'd
    As you shall deem yourself lodg'd in my heart,
    Though so denied fair harbour in my house.
    Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.
    To-morrow shall we visit you again.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Sweet health and fair desires consort your
    Grace!
  KING. Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.
                                            Exit with attendants
  BEROWNE. Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.
  ROSALINE. Pray you, do my commendations;  
    I would be glad to see it.
  BEROWNE. I would you heard it groan.
  ROSALINE. Is the fool sick?
  BEROWNE. Sick at the heart.
  ROSALINE. Alack, let it blood.
  BEROWNE. Would that do it good?
  ROSALINE. My physic says 'ay.'
  BEROWNE. Will YOU prick't with your eye?
  ROSALINE. No point, with my knife.
  BEROWNE. Now, God save thy life!
  ROSALINE. And yours from long living!
  BEROWNE. I cannot stay thanksgiving.                [Retiring]
  DUMAIN. Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
  BOYET. The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.
  DUMAIN. A gallant lady! Monsieur, fare you well.          Exit
  LONGAVILLE. I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
  BOYET. A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
  LONGAVILLE. Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
  BOYET. She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.
  LONGAVILLE. Pray you, sir, whose daughter?  
  BOYET. Her mother's, I have heard.
  LONGAVILLE. God's blessing on your beard!
  BOYET. Good sir, be not offended;
    She is an heir of Falconbridge.
  LONGAVILLE. Nay, my choler is ended.
    She is a most sweet lady.
  BOYET. Not unlike, sir; that may be.           Exit LONGAVILLE
  BEROWNE. What's her name in the cap?
  BOYET. Rosaline, by good hap.
  BEROWNE. Is she wedded or no?
  BOYET. To her will, sir, or so.
  BEROWNE. You are welcome, sir; adieu!
  BOYET. Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
                                     Exit BEROWNE. LADIES Unmask
  MARIA. That last is Berowne, the merry mad-cap lord;
    Not a word with him but a jest.
  BOYET. And every jest but a word.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. It was well done of you to take him at his
    word.
  BOYET. I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.  
  KATHARINE. Two hot sheeps, marry!
  BOYET. And wherefore not ships?
    No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
  KATHARINE. You sheep and I pasture- shall that finish the jest?
  BOYET. So you grant pasture for me.     [Offering to kiss her]
  KATHARINE. Not so, gentle beast;
    My lips are no common, though several they be.
  BOYET. Belonging to whom?
  KATHARINE. To my fortunes and me.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles,
      agree;
    This civil war of wits were much better used
    On Navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.
  BOYET. If my observation, which very seldom lies,
    By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
    Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. With what?
  BOYET. With that which we lovers entitle 'affected.'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Your reason?
  BOYET. Why, all his behaviours did make their retire  
    To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
    His heart, like an agate, with your print impressed,
    Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed;
    His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
    Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
    All senses to that sense did make their repair,
    To feel only looking on fairest of fair.
    Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
    As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
    Who, tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd,
    Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd.
    His face's own margent did quote such amazes
    That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
    I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
    An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Come, to our pavilion. Boyet is dispos'd.
  BOYET. But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd;
    I only have made a mouth of his eye,
    By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
  MARIA. Thou art an old love-monger, and speakest skilfully.  
  KATHARINE. He is Cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
  ROSALINE. Then was Venus like her mother; for her father is but
    grim.
  BOYET. Do you hear, my mad wenches?
  MARIA. No.
  BOYET. What, then; do you see?
  MARIA. Ay, our way to be gone.
  BOYET. You are too hard for me.                         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
The park

Enter ARMADO and MOTH

  ARMADO. Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.
                                         [MOTH sings Concolinel]
  ARMADO. Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years, take this key, give
    enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither; I must
    employ him in a letter to my love.
  MOTH. Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?
  ARMADO. How meanest thou? Brawling in French?
  MOTH. No, my complete master; but to jig off a tune at the tongue's
    end, canary to it with your feet, humour it with turning up your
    eyelids, sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the
    throat, as if you swallowed love with singing love, sometime
    through the nose, as if you snuff'd up love by smelling love,
    with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of your eyes, with
    your arms cross'd on your thin-belly doublet, like a rabbit on a
    spit, or your hands in your pocket, like a man after the old
    painting; and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away.
    These are complements, these are humours; these betray nice  
    wenches, that would be betrayed without these; and make them men
    of note- do you note me?- that most are affected to these.
  ARMADO. How hast thou purchased this experience?
  MOTH. By my penny of observation.
  ARMADO. But O- but O-
  MOTH. The hobby-horse is forgot.
  ARMADO. Call'st thou my love 'hobby-horse'?
  MOTH. No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love
    perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?
  ARMADO. Almost I had.
  MOTH. Negligent student! learn her by heart.
  ARMADO. By heart and in heart, boy.
  MOTH. And out of heart, master; all those three I will prove.
  ARMADO. What wilt thou prove?
  MOTH. A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon the
    instant. By heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by
    her; in heart you love her, because your heart is in love with
    her; and out of heart you love her, being out of heart that you
    cannot enjoy her.
  ARMADO. I am all these three.  
  MOTH. And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.
  ARMADO. Fetch hither the swain; he must carry me a letter.
  MOTH. A message well sympathiz'd- a horse to be ambassador for an
    ass.
  ARMADO. Ha, ha, what sayest thou?
  MOTH. Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is
    very slow-gaited. But I go.
  ARMADO. The way is but short; away.
  MOTH. As swift as lead, sir.
  ARMADO. The meaning, pretty ingenious?
    Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
  MOTH. Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
  ARMADO. I say lead is slow.
  MOTH. You are too swift, sir, to say so:
    Is that lead slow which is fir'd from a gun?
  ARMADO. Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
    He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he;
    I shoot thee at the swain.
  MOTH. Thump, then, and I flee.                            Exit
  ARMADO. A most acute juvenal; volable and free of grace!  
    By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face;
    Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
    My herald is return'd.

                       Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD

  MOTH. A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
  ARMADO. Some enigma, some riddle; come, thy l'envoy; begin.
  COSTARD. No egma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the mail, sir.
    O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain; no l'envoy, no l'envoy; no
    salve, sir, but a plantain!
  ARMADO. By virtue thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought, my
    spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous
    smiling. O, pardon me, my stars! Doth the inconsiderate take
    salve for l'envoy, and the word 'l'envoy' for a salve?
  MOTH. Do the wise think them other? Is not l'envoy a salve?
  ARMADO. No, page; it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain
    Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
    I will example it:
           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,  
           Were still at odds, being but three.
    There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.
  MOTH. I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.
  ARMADO.  The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           Were still at odds, being but three.
  MOTH.    Until the goose came out of door,
           And stay'd the odds by adding four.
    Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my l'envoy.
           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           Were still at odds, being but three.
  ARMADO.  Until the goose came out of door,
           Staying the odds by adding four.
  MOTH. A good l'envoy, ending in the goose; would you desire more?
  COSTARD. The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
    Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
    To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose;
    Let me see: a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.
  ARMADO. Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
  MOTH. By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
    Then call'd you for the l'envoy.  
  COSTARD. True, and I for a plantain. Thus came your argument in;
    Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
    And he ended the market.
  ARMADO. But tell me: how was there a costard broken in a shin?
  MOTH. I will tell you sensibly.
  COSTARD. Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth; I will speak that
      l'envoy.
    I, Costard, running out, that was safely within,
    Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
  ARMADO. We will talk no more of this matter.
  COSTARD. Till there be more matter in the shin.
  ARMADO. Sirrah Costard. I will enfranchise thee.
  COSTARD. O, Marry me to one Frances! I smell some l'envoy, some
    goose, in this.
  ARMADO. By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
    enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured, restrained,
    captivated, bound.
  COSTARD. True, true; and now you will be my purgation, and let me
    loose.
  ARMADO. I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and, in  
    lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: bear this
    significant [giving a letter] to the country maid Jaquenetta;
    there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honour is
    rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.                  Exit
  MOTH. Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
  COSTARD. My sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony Jew!
                                                       Exit MOTH
    Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration! O, that's the
    Latin word for three farthings. Three farthings- remuneration.
    'What's the price of this inkle?'- 'One penny.'- 'No, I'll give
    you a remuneration.' Why, it carries it. Remuneration! Why, it is
    a fairer name than French crown. I will never buy and sell out of
    this word.

                          Enter BEROWNE

  BEROWNE. My good knave Costard, exceedingly well met!
  COSTARD. Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man buy for
    a remuneration?
  BEROWNE. What is a remuneration?  
  COSTARD. Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
  BEROWNE. Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
  COSTARD. I thank your worship. God be wi' you!
  BEROWNE. Stay, slave; I must employ thee.
    As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
    Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
  COSTARD. When would you have it done, sir?
  BEROWNE. This afternoon.
  COSTARD. Well, I will do it, sir; fare you well.
  BEROWNE. Thou knowest not what it is.
  COSTARD. I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
  BEROWNE. Why, villain, thou must know first.
  COSTARD. I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
  BEROWNE. It must be done this afternoon.
    Hark, slave, it is but this:
    The Princess comes to hunt here in the park,
    And in her train there is a gentle lady;
    When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
    And Rosaline they call her. Ask for her,
    And to her white hand see thou do commend  
    This seal'd-up counsel. There's thy guerdon; go.
                                         [Giving him a shilling]
  COSTARD. Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration; a
    'leven-pence farthing better; most sweet gardon! I will do it,
    sir, in print. Gardon- remuneration!                    Exit
  BEROWNE. And I, forsooth, in love; I, that have been love's whip;
    A very beadle to a humorous sigh;
    A critic, nay, a night-watch constable;
    A domineering pedant o'er the boy,
    Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
    This wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
    This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;
    Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
    Th' anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
    Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
    Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
    Sole imperator, and great general
    Of trotting paritors. O my little heart!
    And I to be a corporal of his field,
    And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop!  
    What! I love, I sue, I seek a wife-
    A woman, that is like a German clock,
    Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
    And never going aright, being a watch,
    But being watch'd that it may still go right!
    Nay, to be perjur'd, which is worst of all;
    And, among three, to love the worst of all,
    A whitely wanton with a velvet brow,
    With two pitch balls stuck in her face for eyes;
    Ay, and, by heaven, one that will do the deed,
    Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard.
    And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!
    To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague
    That Cupid will impose for my neglect
    Of his almighty dreadful little might.
    Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, and groan:
    Some men must love my lady, and some Joan.              Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
The park

Enter the PRINCESS, ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, LORDS, ATTENDANTS,
and a FORESTER

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Was that the King that spurr'd his horse so
      hard
    Against the steep uprising of the hill?
  BOYET. I know not; but I think it was not he.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Whoe'er 'a was, 'a show'd a mounting mind.
    Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch;
    On Saturday we will return to France.
    Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
    That we must stand and play the murderer in?
  FORESTER. Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;
    A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I thank my beauty I am fair that shoot,
    And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
  FORESTER. Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. What, what? First praise me, and again say no?
    O short-liv'd pride! Not fair? Alack for woe!  
  FORESTER. Yes, madam, fair.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Nay, never paint me now;
    Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
    Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:
                                             [ Giving him money]
    Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
  FORESTER. Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. See, see, my beauty will be sav'd by merit.
    O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
    A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
    But come, the bow. Now mercy goes to kill,
    And shooting well is then accounted ill;
    Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
    Not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
    If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
    That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
    And, out of question, so it is sometimes:
    Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
    When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
    We bend to that the working of the heart;  
    As I for praise alone now seek to spill
    The poor deer's blood that my heart means no ill.
  BOYET. Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
    Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
    Lords o'er their lords?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Only for praise; and praise we may afford
    To any lady that subdues a lord.

                       Enter COSTARD

  BOYET. Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
  COSTARD. God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that
    have no heads.
  COSTARD. Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The thickest and the tallest.
  COSTARD. The thickest and the tallest! It is so; truth is truth.
    An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
    One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
    Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest here.  
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. What's your will, sir? What's your will?
  COSTARD. I have a letter from Monsieur Berowne to one
    Lady Rosaline.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. O, thy letter, thy letter! He's a good friend
      of mine.
    Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve.
    Break up this capon.
  BOYET. I am bound to serve.
    This letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
    It is writ to Jaquenetta.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. We will read it, I swear.
    Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
  BOYET. [Reads] 'By heaven, that thou art fair is most infallible;
    true that thou art beauteous; truth itself that thou art lovely.
    More fairer than fair, beautiful than beauteous, truer than truth
    itself, have commiseration on thy heroical vassal. The
    magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set eye upon the
    pernicious and indubitate beggar Zenelophon; and he it was that
    might rightly say, 'Veni, vidi, vici'; which to annothanize in
    the vulgar,- O base and obscure vulgar!- videlicet, He came, saw,  
    and overcame. He came, one; saw, two; overcame, three. Who came?-
    the king. Why did he come?- to see. Why did he see?-to overcome.
    To whom came he?- to the beggar. What saw he?- the beggar. Who
    overcame he?- the beggar. The conclusion is victory; on whose
    side?- the king's. The captive is enrich'd; on whose side?- the
    beggar's. The catastrophe is a nuptial; on whose side?- the
    king's. No, on both in one, or one in both. I am the king, for so
    stands the comparison; thou the beggar, for so witnesseth thy
    lowliness. Shall I command thy love? I may. Shall I enforce thy
    love? I could. Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou
    exchange for rags?- robes, for tittles?- titles, for thyself?
    -me. Thus expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot, my
    eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every part.
                  Thine in the dearest design of industry,
                                           DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.

    'Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
    'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey;
    Submissive fall his princely feet before,
    And he from forage will incline to play.  
    But if thou strive, poor soul, what are thou then?
    Food for his rage, repasture for his den.'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. What plume of feathers is he that indited this
      letter?
    What vane? What weathercock? Did you ever hear better?
  BOYET. I am much deceived but I remember the style.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Else your memory is bad, going o'er it
    erewhile.
  BOYET. This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;
    A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
    To the Prince and his book-mates.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thou fellow, a word.
    Who gave thee this letter?
  COSTARD. I told you: my lord.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. To whom shouldst thou give it?
  COSTARD. From my lord to my lady.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. From which lord to which lady?
  COSTARD. From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
    To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords,  
      away.
    [To ROSALINE] Here, sweet, put up this; 'twill be thine another
      day.                             Exeunt PRINCESS and TRAIN
  BOYET. Who is the shooter? who is the shooter?
  ROSALINE. Shall I teach you to know?
  BOYET. Ay, my continent of beauty.
  ROSALINE. Why, she that bears the bow.
    Finely put off!
  BOYET. My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
    Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
    Finely put on!
  ROSALINE. Well then, I am the shooter.
  BOYET. And who is your deer?
  ROSALINE. If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
    Finely put on indeed!
  MARIA. You Still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes at the
    brow.
  BOYET. But she herself is hit lower. Have I hit her now?
  ROSALINE. Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was a man
    when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as touching the hit  
    it?
  BOYET. So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a woman when
    Queen Guinever of Britain was a little wench, as touching the hit
    it.
  ROSALINE. [Singing]
            Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
            Thou canst not hit it, my good man.
  BOYET.    An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
            An I cannot, another can.
                                   Exeunt ROSALINE and KATHARINE
  COSTARD. By my troth, most pleasant! How both did fit it!
  MARIA. A mark marvellous well shot; for they both did hit it.
  BOYET. A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
    Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
  MARIA. Wide o' the bow-hand! I' faith, your hand is out.
  COSTARD. Indeed, 'a must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the
    clout.
  BOYET. An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
  COSTARD. Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
  MARIA. Come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.  
  COSTARD. She's too hard for you at pricks, sir; challenge her to
    bowl.
  BOYET. I fear too much rubbing; good-night, my good owl.
                                          Exeunt BOYET and MARIA
  COSTARD. By my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
    Lord, Lord! how the ladies and I have put him down!
    O' my troth, most sweet jests, most incony vulgar wit!
    When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit.
    Armado a th' t'one side- O, a most dainty man!
    To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
    To see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly 'a will swear!
    And his page a t' other side, that handful of wit!
    Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
    Sola, sola!                                     Exit COSTARD




SCENE II.
The park

From the shooting within, enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL

  NATHANIEL. Very reverent sport, truly; and done in the testimony of
    a good conscience.
  HOLOFERNES. The deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe as
    the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of caelo,
    the sky, the welkin, the heaven; and anon falleth like a crab on
    the face of terra, the soil, the land, the earth.
  NATHANIEL. Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
    varied, like a scholar at the least; but, sir, I assure ye it was
    a buck of the first head.
  HOLOFERNES. Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
  DULL. 'Twas not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.
  HOLOFERNES. Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of insinuation,
    as it were, in via, in way, of explication; facere, as it were,
    replication, or rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
    inclination, after his undressed, unpolished, uneducated,
    unpruned, untrained, or rather unlettered, or ratherest  
    unconfirmed fashion, to insert again my haud credo for a deer.
  DULL. I Said the deer was not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.
  HOLOFERNES. Twice-sod simplicity, bis coctus!
    O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
  NATHANIEL. Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in
      a book;
    He hath not eat paper, as it were; he hath not drunk ink; his
    intellect is not replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible
    in the duller parts;
    And such barren plants are set before us that we thankful should
      be-
    Which we of taste and feeling are- for those parts that do
      fructify in us more than he.
    For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
    So, were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school.
    But, omne bene, say I, being of an old father's mind:
    Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
  DULL. You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit
    What was a month old at Cain's birth that's not five weeks old as
      yet?  
  HOLOFERNES. Dictynna, goodman Dull; Dictynna, goodman Dull.
  DULL. What is Dictynna?
  NATHANIEL. A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
  HOLOFERNES. The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
    And raught not to five weeks when he came to five-score.
    Th' allusion holds in the exchange.
  DULL. 'Tis true, indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.
  HOLOFERNES. God comfort thy capacity! I say th' allusion holds in
    the exchange.
  DULL. And I say the polusion holds in the exchange; for the moon is
    never but a month old; and I say, beside, that 'twas a pricket
    that the Princess kill'd.
  HOLOFERNES. Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph on
    the death of the deer? And, to humour the ignorant, call the deer
    the Princess kill'd a pricket.
  NATHANIEL. Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge, so it shall please
    you to abrogate scurrility.
  HOLOFERNES. I Will something affect the letter, for it argues
    facility.
  
    The preyful Princess pierc'd and prick'd a pretty pleasing
      pricket.
    Some say a sore; but not a sore till now made sore with shooting.
    The dogs did yell; put el to sore, then sorel jumps from thicket-
    Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.
    If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores o' sorel.
    Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.

  NATHANIEL. A rare talent!
  DULL. [Aside] If a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with a
    talent.
  HOLOFERNES. This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a foolish
    extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures, shapes, objects,
    ideas, apprehensions, motions, revolutions. These are begot in
    the ventricle of memory, nourish'd in the womb of pia mater, and
    delivered upon the mellowing of occasion. But the gift is good in
    those in whom it is acute, and I am thankful for it.
  NATHANIEL. Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my
    parishioners; for their sons are well tutor'd by you, and their
    daughters profit very greatly under you. You are a good member of  
    the commonwealth.
  HOLOFERNES. Mehercle, if their sons be ingenious, they shall want
    no instruction; if their daughters be capable, I will put it to
    them; but, vir sapit qui pauca loquitur. A soul feminine saluteth
    us.

                    Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD

  JAQUENETTA. God give you good morrow, Master Person.
  HOLOFERNES. Master Person, quasi pers-one. And if one should be
    pierc'd which is the one?
  COSTARD. Marry, Master Schoolmaster, he that is likest to a
    hogshead.
  HOLOFERNES. Piercing a hogshead! A good lustre of conceit in a turf
    of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough for a swine; 'tis
    pretty; it is well.
  JAQUENETTA. Good Master Parson, be so good as read me this letter;
    it was given me by Costard, and sent me from Don Armado. I
    beseech you read it.
  HOLOFERNES. Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra  
    Ruminat-
    and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan! I may speak of thee as
    the traveller doth of Venice:
                   Venetia, Venetia,
                   Chi non ti vede, non ti pretia.
    Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! Who understandeth thee not,
    loves thee not-
                      Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa.
    Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather as
    Horace says in his- What, my soul, verses?
  NATHANIEL. Ay, sir, and very learned.
  HOLOFERNES. Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse; lege, domine.
  NATHANIEL. [Reads] 'If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to
      love?
    Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed!
    Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove;
    Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like osiers bowed.
    Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,
    Where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend.
    If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;  
    Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend;
    All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
    Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire.
    Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
    Which, not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
    Celestial as thou art, O, pardon love this wrong,
    That singes heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.'
  HOLOFERNES. You find not the apostrophas, and so miss the accent:
    let me supervise the canzonet. Here are only numbers ratified;
    but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden cadence of poesy,
    caret. Ovidius Naso was the man. And why, indeed, 'Naso' but for
    smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy, the jerks of
    invention? Imitari is nothing: so doth the hound his master, the
    ape his keeper, the tired horse his rider. But, damosella virgin,
    was this directed to you?
  JAQUENETTA. Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Berowne, one of the strange
    queen's lords.
  HOLOFERNES. I will overglance the superscript: 'To the snow-white
    hand of the most beauteous Lady Rosaline.' I will look again on
    the intellect of the letter, for the nomination of the party  
    writing to the person written unto: 'Your Ladyship's in all
    desired employment, Berowne.' Sir Nathaniel, this Berowne is one
    of the votaries with the King; and here he hath framed a letter
    to a sequent of the stranger queen's which accidentally, or by
    the way of progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go, my sweet;
    deliver this paper into the royal hand of the King; it may
    concern much. Stay not thy compliment; I forgive thy duty. Adieu.
  JAQUENETTA. Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life!
  COSTARD. Have with thee, my girl.
                                   Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
  NATHANIEL. Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
    religiously; and, as a certain father saith-
  HOLOFERNES. Sir, tell not me of the father; I do fear colourable
    colours. But to return to the verses: did they please you, Sir
    Nathaniel?
  NATHANIEL. Marvellous well for the pen.
  HOLOFERNES. I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil of
    mine; where, if, before repast, it shall please you to gratify
    the table with a grace, I will, on my privilege I have with the
    parents of the foresaid child or pupil, undertake your ben  
    venuto; where I will prove those verses to be very unlearned,
    neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention. I beseech your
    society.
  NATHANIEL. And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is the
    happiness of life.
  HOLOFERNES. And certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
    [To DULL] Sir, I do invite you too; you shall not say me nay:
    pauca verba. Away; the gentles are at their game, and we will to
    our recreation.                                       Exeunt




SCENE III.
The park

Enter BEROWNE, with a paper his band, alone

  BEROWNE. The King he is hunting the deer: I am coursing myself.
    They have pitch'd a toil: I am tolling in a pitch- pitch that
    defiles. Defile! a foul word. Well, 'set thee down, sorrow!' for
    so they say the fool said, and so say I, and I am the fool. Well
    proved, wit. By the Lord, this love is as mad as Ajax: it kills
    sheep; it kills me- I a sheep. Well proved again o' my side. I
    will not love; if I do, hang me. I' faith, I will not. O, but her
    eye! By this light, but for her eye, I would not love her- yes,
    for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing in the world but lie, and
    lie in my throat. By heaven, I do love; and it hath taught me to
    rhyme, and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme, and
    here my melancholy. Well, she hath one o' my sonnets already; the
    clown bore it, the fool sent it, and the lady hath it: sweet
    clown, sweeter fool, sweetest lady! By the world, I would not
    care a pin if the other three were in. Here comes one with a
    paper; God give him grace to groan!
                                            [Climbs into a tree]  

                      Enter the KING, with a paper

  KING. Ay me!
  BEROWNE. Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid; thou hast thump'd
    him with thy bird-bolt under the left pap. In faith, secrets!
  KING. [Reads]
      'So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
      To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
      As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
      The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows;
      Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
      Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
      As doth thy face through tears of mine give light.
      Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep;
      No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
      So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
      Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
      And they thy glory through my grief will show.
      But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep  
      My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
      O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel
      No thought can think nor tongue of mortal tell.'
    How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper-
    Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
                                                   [Steps aside]

                  Enter LONGAVILLE, with a paper

    What, Longaville, and reading! Listen, car.
  BEROWNE. Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
  LONGAVILLE. Ay me, I am forsworn!
  BEROWNE. Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
  KING. In love, I hope; sweet fellowship in shame!
  BEROWNE. One drunkard loves another of the name.
  LONGAVILLE. Am I the first that have been perjur'd so?
  BEROWNE. I could put thee in comfort: not by two that I know;
    Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
    The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.
  LONGAVILLE. I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move.  
    O sweet Maria, empress of my love!
    These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
  BEROWNE. O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:
    Disfigure not his slop.
  LONGAVILLE. This same shall go.          [He reads the sonnet]
      'Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
      'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
      Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
      Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
      A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
      Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
      My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
      Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.
      Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is;
      Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
      Exhal'st this vapour-vow; in thee it is.
      If broken, then it is no fault of mine;
      If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
      To lose an oath to win a paradise?'
  BEROWNE. This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,  
    A green goose a goddess- pure, pure idolatry.
    God amend us, God amend! We are much out o' th' way.

                      Enter DUMAIN, with a paper

  LONGAVILLE. By whom shall I send this?- Company! Stay.
                                                   [Steps aside]
  BEROWNE. 'All hid, all hid'- an old infant play.
    Like a demigod here sit I in the sky,
    And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'er-eye.
    More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!
    Dumain transformed! Four woodcocks in a dish!
  DUMAIN. O most divine Kate!
  BEROWNE. O most profane coxcomb!
  DUMAIN. By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
  BEROWNE. By earth, she is not, corporal: there you lie.
  DUMAIN. Her amber hairs for foul hath amber quoted.
  BEROWNE. An amber-colour'd raven was well noted.
  DUMAIN. As upright as the cedar.
  BEROWNE. Stoop, I say;  
    Her shoulder is with child.
  DUMAIN. As fair as day.
  BEROWNE. Ay, as some days; but then no sun must shine.
  DUMAIN. O that I had my wish!
  LONGAVILLE. And I had mine!
  KING. And I mine too,.good Lord!
  BEROWNE. Amen, so I had mine! Is not that a good word?
  DUMAIN. I would forget her; but a fever she
    Reigns in my blood, and will rememb'red be.
  BEROWNE. A fever in your blood? Why, then incision
    Would let her out in saucers. Sweet misprision!
  DUMAIN. Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
  BEROWNE. Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
  DUMAIN. [Reads]
        'On a day-alack the day!-
        Love, whose month is ever May,
        Spied a blossom passing fair
        Playing in the wanton air.
        Through the velvet leaves the wind,
        All unseen, can passage find;  
        That the lover, sick to death,
        Wish'd himself the heaven's breath.
        "Air," quoth he "thy cheeks may blow;
        Air, would I might triumph so!
        But, alack, my hand is sworn
        Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn;
        Vow, alack, for youth unmeet,
        Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
        Do not call it sin in me
        That I am forsworn for thee;
        Thou for whom Jove would swear
        Juno but an Ethiope were;
        And deny himself for Jove,
        Turning mortal for thy love."'
    This will I send; and something else more plain
    That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
    O, would the King, Berowne and Longaville,
    Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill,
    Would from my forehead wipe a perjur'd note;
    For none offend where all alike do dote.  
  LONGAVILLE. [Advancing] Dumain, thy love is far from charity,
    That in love's grief desir'st society;
    You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
    To be o'erheard and taken napping so.
  KING. [Advancing] Come, sir, you blush; as his, your case is such.
    You chide at him, offending twice as much:
    You do not love Maria! Longaville
    Did never sonnet for her sake compile;
    Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
    His loving bosom, to keep down his heart.
    I have been closely shrouded in this bush,
    And mark'd you both, and for you both did blush.
    I heard your guilty rhymes, observ'd your fashion,
    Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.
    'Ay me!' says one. 'O Jove!' the other cries.
    One, her hairs were gold; crystal the other's eyes.
    [To LONGAVILLE] You would for paradise break faith and troth;
    [To Dumain] And Jove for your love would infringe an oath.
    What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
    Faith infringed which such zeal did swear?  
    How will he scorn, how will he spend his wit!
    How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it!
    For all the wealth that ever I did see,
    I would not have him know so much by me.
  BEROWNE. [Descending] Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy,
    Ah, good my liege, I pray thee pardon me.
    Good heart, what grace hast thou thus to reprove
    These worms for loving, that art most in love?
    Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
    There is no certain princess that appears;
    You'll not be perjur'd; 'tis a hateful thing;
    Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting.
    But are you not ashamed? Nay, are you not,
    All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
    You found his mote; the King your mote did see;
    But I a beam do find in each of three.
    O, what a scene of fool'ry have I seen,
    Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teen!
    O, me, with what strict patience have I sat,
    To see a king transformed to a gnat!  
    To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
    And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
    And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
    And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
    Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain?
    And, gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
    And where my liege's? All about the breast.
    A caudle, ho!
  KING. Too bitter is thy jest.
    Are we betrayed thus to thy over-view?
  BEROWNE. Not you by me, but I betrayed to you.
    I that am honest, I that hold it sin
    To break the vow I am engaged in;
    I am betrayed by keeping company
    With men like you, men of inconstancy.
    When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
    Or groan for Joan? or spend a minute's time
    In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
    Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
    A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,  
    A leg, a limb-
  KING. Soft! whither away so fast?
    A true man or a thief that gallops so?
  BEROWNE. I post from love; good lover, let me go.

                 Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD

  JAQUENETTA. God bless the King!
  KING. What present hast thou there?
  COSTARD. Some certain treason.
  KING. What makes treason here?
  COSTARD. Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
  KING. If it mar nothing neither,
    The treason and you go in peace away together.
  JAQUENETTA. I beseech your Grace, let this letter be read;
    Our person misdoubts it: 'twas treason, he said.
  KING. Berowne, read it over.        [BEROWNE reads the letter]
    Where hadst thou it?
  JAQUENETTA. Of Costard.
  KING. Where hadst thou it?  
  COSTARD. Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
                                      [BEROWNE tears the letter]
  KING. How now! What is in you? Why dost thou tear it?
  BEROWNE. A toy, my liege, a toy! Your Grace needs not fear it.
  LONGAVILLE. It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear
     it.
  DUMAIN. It is Berowne's writing, and here is his name.
                                       [Gathering up the pieces]
  BEROWNE. [ To COSTARD] Ah, you whoreson loggerhead, you were born
      to do me shame.
    Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.
  KING. What?
  BEROWNE. That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess;
    He, he, and you- and you, my liege!- and I
    Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
    O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
    DUMAIN. Now the number is even.
  BEROWNE. True, true, we are four.
    Will these turtles be gone?
  KING. Hence, sirs, away.  
  COSTARD. Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
                                   Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
  BEROWNE. Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
    As true we are as flesh and blood can be.
    The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
    Young blood doth not obey an old decree.
    We cannot cross the cause why we were born,
    Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
  KING. What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
  BEROWNE. 'Did they?' quoth you. Who sees the heavenly Rosaline
    That, like a rude and savage man of Inde
    At the first op'ning of the gorgeous east,
    Bows not his vassal head and, strucken blind,
    Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
    What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
    Dares look upon the heaven of her brow
    That is not blinded by her majesty?
  KING. What zeal, what fury hath inspir'd thee now?
    My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;
    She, an attending star, scarce seen a light.  
  BEROWNE. My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
    O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
    Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty
    Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek,
    Where several worthies make one dignity,
    Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
    Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues-
    Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not!
    To things of sale a seller's praise belongs:
    She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.
    A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn,
    Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye.
    Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born,
    And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy.
    O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine!
  KING. By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
  BEROWNE. Is ebony like her? O wood divine!
    A wife of such wood were felicity.
    O, who can give an oath? Where is a book?
    That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,  
    If that she learn not of her eye to look.
    No face is fair that is not full so black.
  KING. O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
    The hue of dungeons, and the school of night;
    And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
  BEROWNE. Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
    O, if in black my lady's brows be deckt,
    It mourns that painting and usurping hair
    Should ravish doters with a false aspect;
    And therefore is she born to make black fair.
    Her favour turns the fashion of the days;
    For native blood is counted painting now;
    And therefore red that would avoid dispraise
    Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.
  DUMAIN. To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.
  LONGAVILLE. And since her time are colliers counted bright.
  KING. And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
  DUMAIN. Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
  BEROWNE. Your mistresses dare never come in rain
    For fear their colours should be wash'd away.  
  KING. 'Twere good yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
    I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.
  BEROWNE. I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
  KING. No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
  DUMAIN. I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
  LONGAVILLE. Look, here's thy love: my foot and her face see.
                                              [Showing his shoe]
  BEROWNE. O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
    Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
  DUMAIN. O vile! Then, as she goes, what upward lies
    The street should see as she walk'd overhead.
  KING. But what of this? Are we not all in love?
  BEROWNE. Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
  KING. Then leave this chat; and, good Berowne, now prove
    Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
  DUMAIN. Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.
  LONGAVILLE. O, some authority how to proceed;
    Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil!
  DUMAIN. Some salve for perjury.
  BEROWNE. 'Tis more than need.  
    Have at you, then, affection's men-at-arms.
    Consider what you first did swear unto:
    To fast, to study, and to see no woman-
    Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
    Say, can you fast? Your stomachs are too young,
    And abstinence engenders maladies.
    And, where that you you have vow'd to study, lords,
    In that each of you have forsworn his book,
    Can you still dream, and pore, and thereon look?
    For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
    Have found the ground of study's excellence
    Without the beauty of a woman's face?
    From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
    They are the ground, the books, the academes,
    From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.
    Why, universal plodding poisons up
    The nimble spirits in the arteries,
    As motion and long-during action tires
    The sinewy vigour of the traveller.
    Now, for not looking on a woman's face,  
    You have in that forsworn the use of eyes,
    And study too, the causer of your vow;
    For where is author in the world
    Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye?
    Learning is but an adjunct to ourself,
    And where we are our learning likewise is;
    Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes,
    With ourselves.
    Do we not likewise see our learning there?
    O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
    And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
    For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
    In leaden contemplation have found out
    Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
    Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with?
    Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
    And therefore, finding barren practisers,
    Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil;
    But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
    Lives not alone immured in the brain,  
    But with the motion of all elements
    Courses as swift as thought in every power,
    And gives to every power a double power,
    Above their functions and their offices.
    It adds a precious seeing to the eye:
    A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind.
    A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,
    When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd.
    Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
    Than are the tender horns of cockled snails:
    Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste.
    For valour, is not Love a Hercules,
    Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
    Subtle as Sphinx; as sweet and musical
    As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair.
    And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
    Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
    Never durst poet touch a pen to write
    Until his ink were temp'red with Love's sighs;
    O, then his lines would ravish savage ears,  
    And plant in tyrants mild humility.
    From women's eyes this doctrine I derive.
    They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
    They are the books, the arts, the academes,
    That show, contain, and nourish, all the world,
    Else none at all in aught proves excellent.
    Then fools you were these women to forswear;
    Or, keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
    For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love;
    Or for Love's sake, a word that loves all men;
    Or for men's sake, the authors of these women;
    Or women's sake, by whom we men are men-
    Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
    Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
    It is religion to be thus forsworn;
    For charity itself fulfils the law,
    And who can sever love from charity?
  KING. Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
  BEROWNE. Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
    Pell-mell, down with them! be first advis'd,  
    In conflict, that you get the sun of them.
  LONGAVILLE. Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by.
    Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
  KING. And win them too; therefore let us devise
    Some entertainment for them in their tents.
  BEROWNE. First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
    Then homeward every man attach the hand
    Of his fair mistress. In the afternoon
    We will with some strange pastime solace them,
    Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
    For revels, dances, masks, and merry hours,
    Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.
  KING. Away, away! No time shall be omitted
    That will betime, and may by us be fitted.
  BEROWNE. Allons! allons! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn,
    And justice always whirls in equal measure.
    Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
    If so, our copper buys no better treasure.            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
The park

Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL

  HOLOFERNES. Satis quod sufficit.
  NATHANIEL. I praise God for you, sir. Your reasons at dinner have
    been sharp and sententious; pleasant without scurrility, witty
    without affection, audacious without impudency, learned without
    opinion, and strange without heresy. I did converse this quondam
    day with a companion of the King's who is intituled, nominated,
    or called, Don Adriano de Armado.
  HOLOFERNES. Novi hominem tanquam te. His humour is lofty, his
    discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his
    gait majestical and his general behaviour vain, ridiculous, and
    thrasonical. He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd,
    as it were, too peregrinate, as I may call it.
  NATHANIEL. A most singular and choice epithet.
                                      [Draws out his table-book]
  HOLOFERNES. He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than
    the staple of his argument. I abhor such fanatical phantasimes,
    such insociable and point-devise companions; such rackers of  
    orthography, as to speak 'dout' fine, when he should say 'doubt';
    'det' when he should pronounce 'debt'- d, e, b, t, not d, e, t.
    He clepeth a calf 'cauf,' half 'hauf'; neighbour vocatur
    'nebour'; 'neigh' abbreviated 'ne.' This is abhominable- which he
    would call 'abbominable.' It insinuateth me of insanie: ne
    intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.
  NATHANIEL. Laus Deo, bone intelligo.
  HOLOFERNES. 'Bone'?- 'bone' for 'bene.' Priscian a little
    scratch'd; 'twill serve.

                 Enter ARMADO, MOTH, and COSTARD

  NATHANIEL. Videsne quis venit?
  HOLOFERNES. Video, et gaudeo.
  ARMADO. [To MOTH] Chirrah!
  HOLOFERNES. Quare 'chirrah,' not 'sirrah'?
  ARMADO. Men of peace, well encount'red.
  HOLOFERNES. Most military sir, salutation.
  MOTH. [Aside to COSTARD] They have been at a great feast of
    languages and stol'n the scraps.  
  COSTARD. O, they have liv'd long on the alms-basket of words. I
    marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou are
    not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus; thou art
    easier swallowed than a flap-dragon.
  MOTH. Peace! the peal begins.
  ARMADO. [To HOLOFERNES] Monsieur, are you not lett'red?
  MOTH. Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a, b, spelt
    backward with the horn on his head?
  HOLOFERNES. Ba, pueritia, with a horn added.
  MOTH. Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.
  HOLOFERNES. Quis, quis, thou consonant?
  MOTH. The third of the five vowels, if You repeat them; or the
    fifth, if I.
  HOLOFERNES. I will repeat them: a, e, I-
  MOTH. The sheep; the other two concludes it: o, U.
  ARMADO. Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet touch,
    a quick venue of wit- snip, snap, quick and home. It rejoiceth my
    intellect. True wit!
  MOTH. Offer'd by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
  HOLOFERNES. What is the figure? What is the figure?  
  MOTH. Horns.
  HOLOFERNES. Thou disputes like an infant; go whip thy gig.
  MOTH. Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about your
    infamy circum circa- a gig of a cuckold's horn.
  COSTARD. An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it
    to buy ginger-bread. Hold, there is the very remuneration I had
    of thy master, thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of
    discretion. O, an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but
    my bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! Go to;
    thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' ends, as they say.
  HOLOFERNES. O, I smell false Latin; 'dunghill' for unguem.
  ARMADO. Arts-man, preambulate; we will be singuled from the
    barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the charge-house on the
    top of the mountain?
  HOLOFERNES. Or mons, the hill.
  ARMADO. At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
  HOLOFERNES. I do, sans question.
  ARMADO. Sir, it is the King's most sweet pleasure and affection to
    congratulate the Princess at her pavilion, in the posteriors of
    this day; which the rude multitude call the afternoon.  
  HOLOFERNES. The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable,
    congruent, and measurable, for the afternoon. The word is well
    cull'd, chose, sweet, and apt, I do assure you, sir, I do assure.
  ARMADO. Sir, the King is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do
    assure ye, very good friend. For what is inward between us, let
    it pass. I do beseech thee, remember thy courtesy. I beseech
    thee, apparel thy head. And among other importunate and most
    serious designs, and of great import indeed, too- but let that
    pass; for I must tell thee it will please his Grace, by the
    world, sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his royal
    finger thus dally with my excrement, with my mustachio; but,
    sweet heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no fable:
    some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart
    to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world;
    but let that pass. The very all of all is- but, sweet heart, I do
    implore secrecy- that the King would have me present the
    Princess, sweet chuck, with some delightful ostentation, or show,
    or pageant, or antic, or firework. Now, understanding that the
    curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and sudden
    breaking-out of mirth, as it were, I have acquainted you withal,  
    to the end to crave your assistance.
  HOLOFERNES. Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.
    Sir Nathaniel, as concerning some entertainment of time, some
    show in the posterior of this day, to be rend'red by our
    assistance, the King's command, and this most gallant,
    illustrate, and learned gentleman, before the Princess- I say
    none so fit as to present the Nine Worthies.
  NATHANIEL. Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
  HOLOFERNES. Joshua, yourself; myself, Alexander; this gallant
    gentleman, Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his great
    limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great; the page, Hercules.
  ARMADO. Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for that
    Worthy's thumb; he is not so big as the end of his club.
  HOLOFERNES. Shall I have audience? He shall present Hercules in
    minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a snake; and I
    will have an apology for that purpose.
  MOTH. An excellent device! So, if any of the audience hiss, you may
    cry 'Well done, Hercules; now thou crushest the snake!' That is
    the way to make an offence gracious, though few have the grace to
    do it.  
  ARMADO. For the rest of the Worthies?
  HOLOFERNES. I will play three myself.
  MOTH. Thrice-worthy gentleman!
  ARMADO. Shall I tell you a thing?
  HOLOFERNES. We attend.
  ARMADO. We will have, if this fadge not, an antic. I beseech you,
    follow.
  HOLOFERNES. Via, goodman Dull! Thou has spoken no word all this
    while.
  DULL. Nor understood none neither, sir.
  HOLOFERNES. Allons! we will employ thee.
  DULL. I'll make one in a dance, or so, or I will play
    On the tabor to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.
  HOLOFERNES. Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.
The park

Enter the PRINCESS, MARIA, KATHARINE, and ROSALINE

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
    If fairings come thus plentifully in.
    A lady wall'd about with diamonds!
    Look you what I have from the loving King.
  ROSALINE. Madam, came nothing else along with that?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Nothing but this! Yes, as much love in rhyme
    As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper
    Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
    That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
  ROSALINE. That was the way to make his godhead wax;
    For he hath been five thousand year a boy.
  KATHARINE. Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
  ROSALINE. You'll ne'er be friends with him: 'a kill'd your sister.
  KATHARINE. He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
    And so she died. Had she been light, like you,
    Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
    She might 'a been a grandam ere she died.  
    And so may you; for a light heart lives long.
  ROSALINE. What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
  KATHARINE. A light condition in a beauty dark.
  ROSALINE. We need more light to find your meaning out.
  KATHARINE. You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
    Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
  ROSALINE. Look what you do, you do it still i' th' dark.
  KATHARINE. So do not you; for you are a light wench.
  ROSALINE. Indeed, I weigh not you; and therefore light.
  KATHARINE. You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.
  ROSALINE. Great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Well bandied both; a set of wit well play'd.
    But, Rosaline, you have a favour too?
    Who sent it? and what is it?
  ROSALINE. I would you knew.
    An if my face were but as fair as yours,
    My favour were as great: be witness this.
    Nay, I have verses too, I thank Berowne;
    The numbers true, and, were the numb'ring too,
    I were the fairest goddess on the ground.  
    I am compar'd to twenty thousand fairs.
    O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Anything like?
  ROSALINE. Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Beauteous as ink- a good conclusion.
  KATHARINE. Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
  ROSALINE. Ware pencils, ho! Let me not die your debtor,
    My red dominical, my golden letter:
    O that your face were not so full of O's!
  KATHARINE. A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair
    Dumain?
  KATHARINE. Madam, this glove.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Did he not send you twain?
  KATHARINE. Yes, madam; and, moreover,
    Some thousand verses of a faithful lover;
    A huge translation of hypocrisy,
    Vilely compil'd, profound simplicity.
  MARIA. This, and these pearl, to me sent Longaville;
    The letter is too long by half a mile.  
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart
    The chain were longer and the letter short?
  MARIA. Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
  ROSALINE. They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
    That same Berowne I'll torture ere I go.
    O that I knew he were but in by th' week!
    How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
    And wait the season, and observe the times,
    And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
    And shape his service wholly to my hests,
    And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
    So pertaunt-like would I o'ersway his state
    That he should be my fool, and I his fate.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. None are so surely caught, when they are
      catch'd,
    As wit turn'd fool; folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
    Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
    And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
  ROSALINE. The blood of youth burns not with such excess  
    As gravity's revolt to wantonness.
  MARIA. Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
    As fool'ry in the wise when wit doth dote,
    Since all the power thereof it doth apply
    To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.

                          Enter BOYET

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
  BOYET. O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her Grace?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thy news, Boyet?
  BOYET. Prepare, madam, prepare!
    Arm, wenches, arm! Encounters mounted are
    Against your peace. Love doth approach disguis'd,
    Armed in arguments; you'll be surpris'd.
    Muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
    Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Saint Dennis to Saint Cupid! What are they
    That charge their breath against us? Say, scout, say.
  BOYET. Under the cool shade of a sycamore  
    I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
    When, lo, to interrupt my purpos'd rest,
    Toward that shade I might behold addrest
    The King and his companions; warily
    I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
    And overheard what you shall overhear-
    That, by and by, disguis'd they will be here.
    Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
    That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage.
    Action and accent did they teach him there:
    'Thus must thou speak' and 'thus thy body bear,'
    And ever and anon they made a doubt
    Presence majestical would put him out;
    'For' quoth the King 'an angel shalt thou see;
    Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.'
    The boy replied 'An angel is not evil;
    I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.'
    With that all laugh'd, and clapp'd him on the shoulder,
    Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
    One rubb'd his elbow, thus, and fleer'd, and swore  
    A better speech was never spoke before.
    Another with his finger and his thumb
    Cried 'Via! we will do't, come what will come.'
    The third he caper'd, and cried 'All goes well.'
    The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
    With that they all did tumble on the ground,
    With such a zealous laughter, so profound,
    That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
    To check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. But what, but what, come they to visit us?
  BOYET. They do, they do, and are apparell'd thus,
    Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
    Their purpose is to parley, court, and dance;
    And every one his love-feat will advance
    Unto his several mistress; which they'll know
    By favours several which they did bestow.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. And will they so? The gallants shall be task'd,
    For, ladies, we will every one be mask'd;
    And not a man of them shall have the grace,
    Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.  
    Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
    And then the King will court thee for his dear;
    Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
    So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
    And change you favours too; so shall your loves
    Woo contrary, deceiv'd by these removes.
  ROSALINE. Come on, then, wear the favours most in sight.
  KATHARINE. But, in this changing, what is your intent?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The effect of my intent is to cross theirs.
    They do it but in mocking merriment,
    And mock for mock is only my intent.
    Their several counsels they unbosom shall
    To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
    Upon the next occasion that we meet
    With visages display'd to talk and greet.
  ROSALINE. But shall we dance, if they desire us to't?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. No, to the death, we will not move a foot,
    Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace;
    But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
  BOYET. Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,  
    And quite divorce his memory from his part.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt
    The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out.
    There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
    To make theirs ours, and ours none but our own;
    So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
    And they well mock'd depart away with shame.
                                         [Trumpet sounds within]
  BOYET. The trumpet sounds; be mask'd; the maskers come.
                                               [The LADIES mask]

          Enter BLACKAMOORS music, MOTH as Prologue, the
     KING and his LORDS as maskers, in the guise of Russians

  MOTH. All hail, the richest heauties on the earth!
  BOYET. Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
  MOTH. A holy parcel of the fairest dames
                            [The LADIES turn their backs to him]
    That ever turn'd their- backs- to mortal views!
  BEROWNE. Their eyes, villain, their eyes.  
  MOTH. That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!
    Out-
  BOYET. True; out indeed.
  MOTH. Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
    Not to behold-
  BEROWNE. Once to behold, rogue.
  MOTH. Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes- with your
    sun-beamed eyes-
  BOYET. They will not answer to that epithet;
    You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'
  MOTH. They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
  BEROWNE. Is this your perfectness? Be gone, you rogue.
                                                       Exit MOTH
  ROSALINE. What would these strangers? Know their minds, Boyet.
    If they do speak our language, 'tis our will
    That some plain man recount their purposes.
    Know what they would.
  BOYET. What would you with the Princess?
  BEROWNE. Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
  ROSALINE. What would they, say they?  
  BOYET. Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
  ROSALINE. Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
  BOYET. She says you have it, and you may be gone.
  KING. Say to her we have measur'd many miles
    To tread a measure with her on this grass.
  BOYET. They say that they have measur'd many a mile
    To tread a measure with you on this grass.
  ROSALINE. It is not so. Ask them how many inches
    Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
    The measure, then, of one is eas'ly told.
  BOYET. If to come hither you have measur'd miles,
    And many miles, the Princess bids you tell
    How many inches doth fill up one mile.
  BEROWNE. Tell her we measure them by weary steps.
  BOYET. She hears herself.
  ROSALINE. How many weary steps
    Of many weary miles you have o'ergone
    Are numb'red in the travel of one mile?
  BEROWNE. We number nothing that we spend for you;
    Our duty is so rich, so infinite,  
    That we may do it still without accompt.
    Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
    That we, like savages, may worship it.
  ROSALINE. My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
  KING. Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do.
    Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
    Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
  ROSALINE. O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter;
    Thou now requests but moonshine in the water.
  KING. Then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
    Thou bid'st me beg; this begging is not strange.
  ROSALINE. Play, music, then. Nay, you must do it soon.
    Not yet? No dance! Thus change I like the moon.
  KING. Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
  ROSALINE. You took the moon at full; but now she's changed.
  KING. Yet still she is the Moon, and I the Man.
    The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.
  ROSALINE. Our ears vouchsafe it.
  KING. But your legs should do it.
  ROSALINE. Since you are strangers, and come here by chance,  
    We'll not be nice; take hands. We will not dance.
  KING. Why take we hands then?
  ROSALINE. Only to part friends.
    Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
  KING. More measure of this measure; be not nice.
  ROSALINE. We can afford no more at such a price.
  KING. Price you yourselves. What buys your company?
  ROSALINE. Your absence only.
  KING. That can never be.
  ROSALINE. Then cannot we be bought; and so adieu-
    Twice to your visor and half once to you.
  KING. If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
  ROSALINE. In private then.
  KING. I am best pleas'd with that.       [They converse apart]
  BEROWNE. White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
  BEROWNE. Nay, then, two treys, an if you grow so nice,
    Metheglin, wort, and malmsey; well run dice!
    There's half a dozen sweets.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Seventh sweet, adieu!  
    Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
  BEROWNE. One word in secret.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Let it not be sweet.
  BEROWNE. Thou grievest my gall.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Gall! bitter.
  BEROWNE. Therefore meet.                 [They converse apart]
  DUMAIN. Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
  MARIA. Name it.
  DUMAIN. Fair lady-
  MARIA. Say you so? Fair lord-
    Take that for your fair lady.
  DUMAIN. Please it you,
    As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
                                           [They converse apart]
  KATHARINE. What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
  LONGAVILLE. I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
  KATHARINE. O for your reason! Quickly, sir; I long.
  LONGAVILLE. You have a double tongue within your mask,
    And would afford my speechless vizard half.
  KATHARINE. 'Veal' quoth the Dutchman. Is not 'veal' a calf?  
  LONGAVILLE. A calf, fair lady!
  KATHARINE. No, a fair lord calf.
  LONGAVILLE. Let's part the word.
  KATHARINE. No, I'll not be your half.
    Take all and wean it; it may prove an ox.
  LONGAVILLE. Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
    Will you give horns, chaste lady? Do not so.
  KATHARINE. Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
  LONGAVILLE. One word in private with you ere I die.
  KATHARINE. Bleat softly, then; the butcher hears you cry.
                                           [They converse apart]
  BOYET. The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
    As is the razor's edge invisible,
    Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
    Above the sense of sense; so sensible
    Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings,
    Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
  ROSALINE. Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
  BEROWNE. By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
  KING. Farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.  
                             Exeunt KING, LORDS, and BLACKAMOORS
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
    Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
  BOYET. Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
  ROSALINE. Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
    Will they not, think you, hang themselves to-night?
    Or ever but in vizards show their faces?
    This pert Berowne was out of count'nance quite.
  ROSALINE. They were all in lamentable cases!
    The King was weeping-ripe for a good word.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Berowne did swear himself out of all suit.
  MARIA. Dumain was at my service, and his sword.
    'No point' quoth I; my servant straight was mute.
  KATHARINE. Lord Longaville said I came o'er his heart;
    And trow you what he call'd me?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Qualm, perhaps.
  KATHARINE. Yes, in good faith.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Go, sickness as thou art!
  ROSALINE. Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.  
    But will you hear? The King is my love sworn.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. And quick Berowne hath plighted faith to me.
  KATHARINE. And Longaville was for my service born.
  MARIA. Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
  BOYET. Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
    Immediately they will again be here
    In their own shapes; for it can never be
    They will digest this harsh indignity.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Will they return?
  BOYET. They will, they will, God knows,
    And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows;
    Therefore, change favours; and, when they repair,
    Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. How blow? how blow? Speak to be understood.
  BOYET. Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud:
    Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
    Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do
    If they return in their own shapes to woo?
  ROSALINE. Good madam, if by me you'll be advis'd,  
    Let's mock them still, as well known as disguis'd.
    Let us complain to them what fools were here,
    Disguis'd like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
    And wonder what they were, and to what end
    Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd,
    And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
    Should be presented at our tent to us.
  BOYET. Ladies, withdraw; the gallants are at hand.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.
                 Exeunt PRINCESS, ROSALINE, KATHARINE, and MARIA

         Re-enter the KING, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN,
                        in their proper habits

  KING. Fair sir, God save you! Where's the Princess?
  BOYET. Gone to her tent. Please it your Majesty
    Command me any service to her thither?
  KING. That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
  BOYET. I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.          Exit
  BEROWNE. This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,  
    And utters it again when God doth please.
    He is wit's pedlar, and retails his wares
    At wakes, and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs;
    And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
    Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
    This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
    Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve.
    'A can carve too, and lisp; why this is he
    That kiss'd his hand away in courtesy;
    This is the ape of form, Monsieur the Nice,
    That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
    In honourable terms; nay, he can sing
    A mean most meanly; and in ushering,
    Mend him who can. The ladies call him sweet;
    The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet.
    This is the flow'r that smiles on every one,
    To show his teeth as white as whales-bone;
    And consciences that will not die in debt
    Pay him the due of 'honey-tongued Boyet.'
  KING. A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,  
    That put Armado's page out of his part!

        Re-enter the PRINCESS, ushered by BOYET; ROSALINE,
                      MARIA, and KATHARINE

  BEROWNE. See where it comes! Behaviour, what wert thou
    Till this man show'd thee? And what art thou now?
  KING. All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. 'Fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as I conceive.
  KING. Construe my speeches better, if you may.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Then wish me better; I will give you leave.
  KING. We came to visit you, and purpose now
    To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
    Nor God, nor I, delights in perjur'd men.
  KING. Rebuke me not for that which you provoke.
    The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. You nickname virtue: vice you should have
      spoke;
    For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.  
    Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
    As the unsullied lily, I protest,
    A world of torments though I should endure,
    I would not yield to be your house's guest;
    So much I hate a breaking cause to be
    Of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.
  KING. O, you have liv'd in desolation here,
    Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;
    We have had pastimes here, and pleasant game;
    A mess of Russians left us but of late.
  KING. How, madam! Russians!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Ay, in truth, my lord;
    Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
  ROSALINE. Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord.
    My lady, to the manner of the days,
    In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
    We four indeed confronted were with four
    In Russian habit; here they stayed an hour
    And talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord,  
    They did not bless us with one happy word.
    I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
    When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
  BEROWNE. This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet,
    Your wit makes wise things foolish; when we greet,
    With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
    By light we lose light; your capacity
    Is of that nature that to your huge store
    Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
  ROSALINE. This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye-
  BEROWNE. I am a fool, and full of poverty.
  ROSALINE. But that you take what doth to you belong,
    It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
  BEROWNE. O, I am yours, and all that I possess.
  ROSALINE. All the fool mine?
  BEROWNE. I cannot give you less.
  ROSALINE. Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
  BEROWNE. Where? when? what vizard? Why demand you this?
  ROSALINE. There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
    That hid the worse and show'd the better face.  
  KING. We were descried; they'll mock us now downright.
  DUMAIN. Let us confess, and turn it to a jest.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Amaz'd, my lord? Why looks your Highness sad?
  ROSALINE. Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?
    Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
  BEROWNE. Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
    Can any face of brass hold longer out?
    Here stand I, lady- dart thy skill at me,
    Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout,
    Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance,
    Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
    And I will wish thee never more to dance,
    Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
    O, never will I trust to speeches penn'd,
    Nor to the motion of a school-boy's tongue,
    Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
    Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song.
    Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
    Three-pil'd hyperboles, spruce affectation,
    Figures pedantical- these summer-flies  
    Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
    I do forswear them; and I here protest,
    By this white glove- how white the hand, God knows!-
    Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd
    In russet yeas, and honest kersey noes.
    And, to begin, wench- so God help me, law!-
    My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
  ROSALINE. Sans 'sans,' I pray you.
  BEROWNE. Yet I have a trick
    Of the old rage; bear with me, I am sick;
    I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see-
    Write 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three;
    They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
    They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
    These lords are visited; you are not free,
    For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
  BEROWNE. Our states are forfeit; seek not to undo us.
  ROSALINE. It is not so; for how can this be true,
    That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?  
  BEROWNE. Peace; for I will not have to do with you.
  ROSALINE. Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
  BEROWNE. Speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.
  KING. Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
    Some fair excuse.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The fairest is confession.
    Were not you here but even now, disguis'd?
  KING. Madam, I was.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. And were you well advis'd?
  KING. I was, fair madam.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. When you then were here,
    What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
  KING. That more than all the world I did respect her.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. When she shall challenge this, you will reject
    her.
  KING. Upon mine honour, no.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Peace, peace, forbear;
    Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
  KING. Despise me when I break this oath of mine.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I will; and therefore keep it. Rosaline,  
    What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
  ROSALINE. Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
    As precious eyesight, and did value me
    Above this world; adding thereto, moreover,
    That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. God give thee joy of him! The noble lord
     Most honourably doth uphold his word.
  KING. What mean you, madam? By my life, my troth,
    I never swore this lady such an oath.
  ROSALINE. By heaven, you did; and, to confirm it plain,
    You gave me this; but take it, sir, again.
  KING. My faith and this the Princess I did give;
    I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
    And Lord Berowne, I thank him, is my dear.
    What, will you have me, or your pearl again?
 BEROWNE. Neither of either; I remit both twain.
    I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
    Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
    To dash it like a Christmas comedy.
    Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,  
    Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
    That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
    To make my lady laugh when she's dispos'd,
    Told our intents before; which once disclos'd,
    The ladies did change favours; and then we,
    Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
    Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
    We are again forsworn in will and error.
    Much upon this it is; [To BOYET] and might not you
    Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
    Do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier,
    And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
    And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
    Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
    You put our page out. Go, you are allow'd;
    Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
    You leer upon me, do you? There's an eye
    Wounds like a leaden sword.
  BOYET. Full merrily
    Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.  
  BEROWNE. Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace; I have done.

                          Enter COSTARD

    Welcome, pure wit! Thou part'st a fair fray.
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, they would know
     Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no?
  BEROWNE. What, are there but three?
  COSTARD. No, sir; but it is vara fine,
    For every one pursents three.
  BEROWNE. And three times thrice is nine.
  COSTARD. Not so, sir; under correction, sir,
    I hope it is not so.
    You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir; we know what we
      know;
    I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir-
  BEROWNE. Is not nine.
  COSTARD. Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
  BEROWNE. By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living by  
    reck'ning, sir.
  BEROWNE. How much is it?
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors, sir, will
    show whereuntil it doth amount. For mine own part, I am, as they
    say, but to parfect one man in one poor man, Pompion the Great,
    sir.
  BEROWNE. Art thou one of the Worthies?
  COSTARD. It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the Great;
    for mine own part, I know not the degree of the Worthy; but I am
    to stand for him.
  BEROWNE. Go, bid them prepare.
  COSTARD. We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take some care.
                                                    Exit COSTARD
  KING. Berowne, they will shame us; let them not approach.
  BEROWNE. We are shame-proof, my lord, and 'tis some policy
    To have one show worse than the King's and his company.
  KING. I say they shall not come.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.
    That sport best pleases that doth least know how;
    Where zeal strives to content, and the contents  
    Dies in the zeal of that which it presents.
    Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
    When great things labouring perish in their birth.
  BEROWNE. A right description of our sport, my lord.

                        Enter ARMADO

  ARMADO. Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet
    breath as will utter a brace of words.
           [Converses apart with the KING, and delivers a paper]
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Doth this man serve God?
  BEROWNE. Why ask you?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. 'A speaks not like a man of God his making.
  ARMADO. That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for, I
    protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical; too too vain,
    too too vain; but we will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la
    guerra. I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
                                                     Exit ARMADO
  KING. Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He presents
    Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the Great; the parish curate,  
    Alexander; Arinado's page, Hercules; the pedant, Judas
    Maccabaeus.
    And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
    These four will change habits and present the other five.
  BEROWNE. There is five in the first show.
  KING. You are deceived, 'tis not so.
  BEROWNE. The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool, and
    the boy:
    Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
    Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
  KING. The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.

                   Enter COSTARD, armed for POMPEY

  COSTARD. I Pompey am-
  BEROWNE. You lie, you are not he.
  COSTARD. I Pompey am-
  BOYET. With libbard's head on knee.
  BEROWNE. Well said, old mocker; I must needs be friends with thee.
  COSTARD. I Pompey am, Pompey surnam'd the Big-  
   DUMAIN. The Great.
  COSTARD. It is Great, sir.
    Pompey surnam'd the Great,
    That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to
      sweat;
    And travelling along this coast, I bere am come by chance,
    And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France.

    If your ladyship would say 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Great thanks, great Pompey.
  COSTARD. 'Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect.
    I made a little fault in Great.
  BEROWNE. My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.

                 Enter SIR NATHANIEL, for ALEXANDER

  NATHANIEL. When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's commander;
    By east, west, north, and south, I spread my conquering might.
    My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander-
  BOYET. Your nose says, no, you are not; for it stands to right.  
  BEROWNE. Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling
    knight.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good
    Alexander.
  NATHANIEL. When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's commander-
  BOYET. Most true, 'tis right, you were so, Alisander.
  BEROWNE. Pompey the Great!
  COSTARD. Your servant, and Costard.
  BEROWNE. Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.
  COSTARD. [To Sir Nathaniel] O, Sir, you have overthrown Alisander
    the conqueror! You will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth for
    this. Your lion, that holds his poleaxe sitting on a close-stool,
    will be given to Ajax. He will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror
    and afeard to speak! Run away for shame, Alisander.
    [Sir Nathaniel retires] There, an't shall please you, a foolish
    mild man; an honest man, look you, and soon dash'd. He is a
    marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good bowler; but for
    Alisander- alas! you see how 'tis- a little o'erparted. But there
    are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Stand aside, good Pompey.  

         Enter HOLOFERNES, for JUDAS; and MOTH, for HERCULES

  HOLOFERNES. Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
    Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canus;
    And when be was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
    Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
    Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
    Ergo I come with this apology.
    Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.      [MOTH retires]
    Judas I am-
  DUMAIN. A Judas!
  HOLOFERNES. Not Iscariot, sir.
    Judas I am, ycliped Maccabaeus.
  DUMAIN. Judas Maccabaeus clipt is plain Judas.
  BEROWNE. A kissing traitor. How art thou prov'd Judas?
  HOLOFERNES. Judas I am-
  DUMAIN. The more shame for you, Judas!
  HOLOFERNES. What mean you, sir?
  BOYET. To make Judas hang himself.  
  HOLOFERNES. Begin, sir; you are my elder.
  BEROWNE. Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
  HOLOFERNES. I will not be put out of countenance.
  BEROWNE. Because thou hast no face.
  HOLOFERNES. What is this?
  BOYET. A cittern-head.
  DUMAIN. The head of a bodkin.
  BEROWNE. A death's face in a ring.
  LONGAVILLE. The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
  BOYET. The pommel of Coesar's falchion.
  DUMAIN. The carv'd-bone face on a flask.
  BEROWNE. Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch.
  DUMAIN. Ay, and in a brooch of lead.
  BEROWNE. Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer. And now,
    forward; for we have put thee in countenance.
  HOLOFERNES. You have put me out of countenance.
  BEROWNE. False: we have given thee faces.
  HOLOFERNES. But you have outfac'd them all.
  BEROWNE. An thou wert a lion we would do so.
  BOYET. Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.  
    And so adieu, sweet Jude! Nay, why dost thou stay?
  DUMAIN. For the latter end of his name.
  BEROWNE. For the ass to the Jude; give it him- Jud-as, away.
  HOLOFERNES. This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
  BOYET. A light for Monsieur Judas! It grows dark, he may stumble.
                                            [HOLOFERNES retires]
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!

                   Enter ARMADO, for HECTOR

  BEROWNE. Hide thy head, Achilles; here comes Hector in arms.
  DUMAIN. Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.
  KING. Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.
  BOYET. But is this Hector?
  DUMAIN. I think Hector was not so clean-timber'd.
  LONGAVILLE. His leg is too big for Hector's.
  DUMAIN. More calf, certain.
  BOYET. No; he is best indued in the small.
  BEROWNE. This cannot be Hector.
  DUMAIN. He's a god or a painter, for he makes faces.  
  ARMADO. The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift-
  DUMAIN. A gilt nutmeg.
  BEROWNE. A lemon.
  LONGAVILLE. Stuck with cloves.
  DUMAIN. No, cloven.
  ARMADO. Peace!
    The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
    A man so breathed that certain he would fight ye,
    From morn till night out of his pavilion.
    I am that flower-
  DUMAIN. That mint.
  LONGAVILLE. That columbine.
  ARMADO. Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
  LONGAVILLE. I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against
    Hector.
  DUMAIN. Ay, and Hector's a greyhound.
  ARMADO. The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks, beat
    not the bones of the buried; when he breathed, he was a man. But  
    I will forward with my device. [To the PRINCESS] Sweet royalty,
    bestow on me the sense of hearing.

          [BEROWNE steps forth, and speaks to COSTARD]

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Speak, brave Hector; we are much delighted.
  ARMADO. I do adore thy sweet Grace's slipper.
  BOYET. [Aside to DUMAIN] Loves her by the foot.
  DUMAIN. [Aside to BOYET] He may not by the yard.
  ARMADO. This Hector far surmounted Hannibal-
  COSTARD. The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she is two
    months on her way.
  ARMADO. What meanest thou?
  COSTARD. Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor wench
    is cast away. She's quick; the child brags in her belly already;
    'tis yours.
  ARMADO. Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? Thou shalt die.
  COSTARD. Then shall Hector be whipt for Jaquenetta that is quick by
    him, and hang'd for Pompey that is dead by him.
  DUMAIN. Most rare Pompey!  
  BOYET. Renowned Pompey!
  BEROWNE. Greater than Great! Great, great, great Pompey! Pompey the
    Huge!
  DUMAIN. Hector trembles.
  BEROWNE. Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! Stir them on! stir
    them on!
  DUMAIN. Hector will challenge him.
  BEROWNE. Ay, if 'a have no more man's blood in his belly than will
    sup a flea.
  ARMADO. By the North Pole, I do challenge thee.
  COSTARD. I will not fight with a pole, like a Northern man; I'll
    slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you, let me borrow my
    arms again.
  DUMAIN. Room for the incensed Worthies!
  COSTARD. I'll do it in my shirt.
  DUMAIN. Most resolute Pompey!
  MOTH. Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do you not see
    Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean you? You will lose
    your reputation.
  ARMADO. Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not combat in my  
    shirt.
  DUMAIN. You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.
  ARMADO. Sweet bloods, I both may and will.
  BEROWNE. What reason have you for 't?
  ARMADO. The naked truth of it is: I have no shirt; I go woolward
    for penance.
  BOYET. True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of linen;
    since when, I'll be sworn, he wore none but a dishclout of
    Jaquenetta's, and that 'a wears next his heart for a favour.

                 Enter as messenger, MONSIEUR MARCADE

  MARCADE. God save you, madam!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Welcome, Marcade;
    But that thou interruptest our merriment.
  MARCADE. I am sorry, madam; for the news I bring
    Is heavy in my tongue. The King your father-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Dead, for my life!
  MARCADE. Even so; my tale is told.
  BEROWNE. WOrthies away; the scene begins to cloud.  
  ARMADO. For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have seen the
    day of wrong through the little hole of discretion, and I will
    right myself like a soldier.                 Exeunt WORTHIES
  KING. How fares your Majesty?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Boyet, prepare; I will away to-night.
  KING. Madam, not so; I do beseech you stay.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
    For all your fair endeavours, and entreat,
    Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
    In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
    The liberal opposition of our spirits,
    If over-boldly we have borne ourselves
    In the converse of breath- your gentleness
    Was guilty of it. Farewell, worthy lord.
    A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue.
    Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
    For my great suit so easily obtain'd.
  KING. The extreme parts of time extremely forms
    All causes to the purpose of his speed;
    And often at his very loose decides  
    That which long process could not arbitrate.
    And though the mourning brow of progeny
    Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
    The holy suit which fain it would convince,
    Yet, since love's argument was first on foot,
    Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
    From what it purpos'd; since to wail friends lost
    Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
    As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I understand you not; my griefs are double.
  BEROWNE. Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
    And by these badges understand the King.
    For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
    Play'd foul play with our oaths; your beauty, ladies,
    Hath much deformed us, fashioning our humours
    Even to the opposed end of our intents;
    And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous,
    As love is full of unbefitting strains,
    All wanton as a child, skipping and vain;
    Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,  
    Full of strange shapes, of habits, and of forms,
    Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
    To every varied object in his glance;
    Which parti-coated presence of loose love
    Put on by us, if in your heavenly eyes
    Have misbecom'd our oaths and gravities,
    Those heavenly eyes that look into these faults
    Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
    Our love being yours, the error that love makes
    Is likewise yours. We to ourselves prove false,
    By being once false for ever to be true
    To those that make us both- fair ladies, you;
    And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
    Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. We have receiv'd your letters, full of love;
    Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
    And, in our maiden council, rated them
    At courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
    As bombast and as lining to the time;
    But more devout than this in our respects  
    Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
    In their own fashion, like a merriment.
  DUMAIN. Our letters, madam, show'd much more than jest.
  LONGAVILLE. So did our looks.
  ROSALINE. We did not quote them so.
  KING. Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
    Grant us your loves.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. A time, methinks, too short
    To make a world-without-end bargain in.
    No, no, my lord, your Grace is perjur'd much,
    Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this,
    If for my love, as there is no such cause,
    You will do aught- this shall you do for me:
    Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed
    To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
    Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
    There stay until the twelve celestial signs
    Have brought about the annual reckoning.
    If this austere insociable life
    Change not your offer made in heat of blood,  
    If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds,
    Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
    But that it bear this trial, and last love,
    Then, at the expiration of the year,
    Come, challenge me, challenge me by these deserts;
    And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine,
    I will be thine; and, till that instant, shut
    My woeful self up in a mournful house,
    Raining the tears of lamentation
    For the remembrance of my father's death.
    If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
    Neither intitled in the other's heart.
  KING. If this, or more than this, I would deny,
    To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
    The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
    Hence hermit then, my heart is in thy breast.
  BEROWNE. And what to me, my love? and what to me?
  ROSALINE. You must he purged too, your sins are rack'd;
    You are attaint with faults and perjury;
    Therefore, if you my favour mean to get,  
    A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
    But seek the weary beds of people sick.
  DUMAIN. But what to me, my love? but what to me?
    A wife?
  KATHARINE. A beard, fair health, and honesty;
    With threefold love I wish you all these three.
  DUMAIN. O, shall I say I thank you, gentle wife?
  KATHARINE. No so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a day
    I'll mark no words that smooth-fac'd wooers say.
    Come when the King doth to my lady come;
    Then, if I have much love, I'll give you some.
  DUMAIN. I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then.
  KATHARINE. Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
  LONGAVILLE. What says Maria?
  MARIA. At the twelvemonth's end
    I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
  LONGAVILLE. I'll stay with patience; but the time is long.
  MARIA. The liker you; few taller are so young.
  BEROWNE. Studies my lady? Mistress, look on me;
    Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,  
    What humble suit attends thy answer there.
    Impose some service on me for thy love.
  ROSALINE. Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Berowne,
    Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
    Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
    Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
    Which you on all estates will execute
    That lie within the mercy of your wit.
    To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
    And therewithal to win me, if you please,
    Without the which I am not to be won,
    You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
    Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
    With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
    With all the fierce endeavour of your wit,
    To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
  BEROWNE. To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
    It cannot be; it is impossible;
    Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
  ROSALINE. Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,  
    Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
    Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools.
    A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
    Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
    Of him that makes it; then, if sickly ears,
    Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
    Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
    And I will have you and that fault withal.
    But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
    And I shall find you empty of that fault,
    Right joyful of your reformation.
  BEROWNE. A twelvemonth? Well, befall what will befall,
    I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. [ To the King] Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take
    my leave.
  KING. No, madam; we will bring you on your way.
  BEROWNE. Our wooing doth not end like an old play:
    Jack hath not Jill. These ladies' courtesy
    Might well have made our sport a comedy.
  KING. Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth an' a day,  
    And then 'twill end.
  BEROWNE. That's too long for a play.

                          Re-enter ARMADO

  ARMADO. Sweet Majesty, vouchsafe me-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Was not that not Hector?
  DUMAIN. The worthy knight of Troy.
  ARMADO. I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am a
    votary: I have vow'd to Jaquenetta to hold the plough for her
    sweet love three year. But, most esteemed greatness, will you
    hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in
    praise of the Owl and the Cuckoo? It should have followed in the
    end of our show.
  KING. Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
  ARMADO. Holla! approach.

                            Enter All

    This side is Hiems, Winter; this Ver, the Spring- the one  
    maintained by the Owl, th' other by the Cuckoo. Ver, begin.

                      SPRING
         When daisies pied and violets blue
         And lady-smocks all silver-white
         And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
         Do paint the meadows with delight,
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
              'Cuckoo;
         Cuckoo, cuckoo'- O word of fear,
         Unpleasing to a married ear!

         When shepherds pipe on oaten straws,
         And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks;
         When turtles tread, and rooks and daws,
         And maidens bleach their summer smocks;
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
              'Cuckoo;  
         Cuckoo, cuckoo'- O word of fear,
         Unpleasing to a married ear!


                    WINTER

         When icicles hang by the wall,
         And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
         And Tom bears logs into the hall,
         And milk comes frozen home in pail,
         When blood is nipp'd, and ways be foul,
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
              'Tu-who;
         Tu-whit, Tu-who'- A merry note,
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

         When all aloud the wind doth blow,
         And coughing drowns the parson's saw,
         And birds sit brooding in the snow,
         And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
         When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,  
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
              'Tu-who;
         Tu-whit, To-who'- A merry note,
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

  ARMADO. The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.
    You that way: we this way.                            Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>






1606

THE TRAGEDY OF MACBETH


by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  DUNCAN, King of Scotland
  MACBETH, Thane of Glamis and Cawdor, a general in the King's army
  LADY MACBETH, his wife
  MACDUFF, Thane of Fife, a nobleman of Scotland
  LADY MACDUFF, his wife
  MALCOLM, elder son of Duncan
  DONALBAIN, younger son of Duncan
  BANQUO, Thane of Lochaber, a general in the King's army
  FLEANCE, his son
  LENNOX, nobleman of Scotland
  ROSS, nobleman of Scotland
  MENTEITH nobleman of Scotland
  ANGUS, nobleman of Scotland
  CAITHNESS, nobleman of Scotland
  SIWARD, Earl of Northumberland, general of the English forces
  YOUNG SIWARD, his son
  SEYTON, attendant to Macbeth
  HECATE, Queen of the Witches
  The Three Witches
  Boy, Son of Macduff  
  Gentlewoman attending on Lady Macbeth
  An English Doctor
  A Scottish Doctor
  A Sergeant
  A Porter
  An Old Man
  The Ghost of Banquo and other Apparitions
  Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers, Murtherers, Attendants,
     and Messengers




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE: Scotland and England


ACT I. SCENE I.
A desert place. Thunder and lightning.

Enter three Witches.

  FIRST WITCH. When shall we three meet again?
    In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
  SECOND WITCH. When the hurlyburly's done,
    When the battle's lost and won.
  THIRD WITCH. That will be ere the set of sun.
  FIRST WITCH. Where the place?
  SECOND WITCH. Upon the heath.
  THIRD WITCH. There to meet with Macbeth.
  FIRST WITCH. I come, Graymalkin.
  ALL. Paddock calls. Anon!
    Fair is foul, and foul is fair.
    Hover through the fog and filthy air.                Exeunt.




SCENE II.
A camp near Forres. Alarum within.

Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Lennox, with Attendants,
meeting a bleeding Sergeant.

  DUNCAN. What bloody man is that? He can report,
    As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
    The newest state.
  MALCOLM. This is the sergeant
    Who like a good and hardy soldier fought
    'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend!
    Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
    As thou didst leave it.
  SERGEANT. Doubtful it stood,
    As two spent swimmers that do cling together
    And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald-
    Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
    The multiplying villainies of nature
    Do swarm upon him -from the Western Isles
    Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
    And Fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,  
    Show'd like a rebel's whore. But all's too weak;
    For brave Macbeth -well he deserves that name-
    Disdaining Fortune, with his brandish'd steel,
    Which smoked with bloody execution,
    Like Valor's minion carved out his passage
    Till he faced the slave,
    Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
    Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,
    And fix'd his head upon our battlements.
  DUNCAN. O valiant cousin! Worthy gentleman!
  SERGEANT. As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
    Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,
    So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come
    Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark.
    No sooner justice had, with valor arm'd,
    Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
    But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
    With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men,
    Began a fresh assault.
  DUNCAN. Dismay'd not this  
    Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo.?
  SERGEANT. Yes,
    As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
    If I say sooth, I must report they were
    As cannons overcharged with double cracks,
    So they
    Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.
    Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
    Or memorize another Golgotha,
    I cannot tell-
    But I am faint; my gashes cry for help.
  DUNCAN. So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
    They smack of honor both. Go get him surgeons.
                                        Exit Sergeant, attended.
    Who comes here?

                       Enter Ross.

  MALCOLM The worthy Thane of Ross.
  LENNOX. What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look  
    That seems to speak things strange.
  ROSS. God save the King!
  DUNCAN. Whence camest thou, worthy Thane?
  ROSS. From Fife, great King,
    Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
    And fan our people cold.
    Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
    Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
    The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
    Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,
    Confronted him with self-comparisons,
    Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm,
    Curbing his lavish spirit; and, to conclude,
    The victory fell on us.
  DUNCAN. Great happiness!
  ROSS. That now
    Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition;
    Nor would we deign him burial of his men
    Till he disbursed, at Saint Colme's Inch,
    Ten thousand dollars to our general use.  
  DUNCAN. No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
    Our bosom interest. Go pronounce his present death,
    And with his former title greet Macbeth.
  ROSS. I'll see it done.
  DUNCAN. What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.
                                                         Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A heath. Thunder.

Enter the three Witches.

  FIRST WITCH. Where hast thou been, sister?
  SECOND WITCH. Killing swine.
  THIRD WITCH. Sister, where thou?
  FIRST WITCH. A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,
    And mounch'd, and mounch'd, and mounch'd. "Give me," quoth I.
    "Aroint thee, witch!" the rump-fed ronyon cries.
    Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master the Tiger;
    But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
    And, like a rat without a tail,
    I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.
  SECOND WITCH. I'll give thee a wind.
  FIRST WITCH. Thou'rt kind.
  THIRD WITCH. And I another.
  FIRST WITCH. I myself have all the other,
    And the very ports they blow,
    All the quarters that they know
    I' the shipman's card.  
    I will drain him dry as hay:
    Sleep shall neither night nor day
    Hang upon his penthouse lid;
    He shall live a man forbid.
    Weary se'nnights nine times nine
    Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine;
    Though his bark cannot be lost,
    Yet it shall be tempest-toss'd.
    Look what I have.
  SECOND WITCH. Show me, show me.
  FIRST WITCH. Here I have a pilot's thumb,
    Wreck'd as homeward he did come.                Drum within.
  THIRD WITCH. A drum, a drum!
    Macbeth doth come.
  ALL. The weird sisters, hand in hand,
    Posters of the sea and land,
    Thus do go about, about,
    Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
    And thrice again, to make up nine.
    Peace! The charm's wound up.  

                 Enter Macbeth and Banquo.

  MACBETH. So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
  BANQUO. How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these
    So wither'd and so wild in their attire,
    That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,
    And yet are on't? Live you? or are you aught
    That man may question? You seem to understand me,
    By each at once her choppy finger laying
    Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
    And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
    That you are so.
  MACBETH. Speak, if you can. What are you?
  FIRST WITCH. All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
  SECOND WITCH. All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
  THIRD WITCH. All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be King hereafter!
  BANQUO. Good sir, why do you start, and seem to fear
    Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,
    Are ye fantastical or that indeed  
    Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner
    You greet with present grace and great prediction
    Of noble having and of royal hope,
    That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
    If you can look into the seeds of time,
    And say which grain will grow and which will not,
    Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
    Your favors nor your hate.
  FIRST WITCH. Hail!
  SECOND WITCH. Hail!
  THIRD WITCH. Hail!
  FIRST WITCH. Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.
  SECOND WITCH. Not so happy, yet much happier.
  THIRD WITCH. Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.
    So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
  FIRST WITCH. Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
  MACBETH. Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more.
    By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Glamis;
    But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives,
    A prosperous gentleman; and to be King  
    Stands not within the prospect of belief,
    No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
    You owe this strange intelligence, or why
    Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
    With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.
                                                 Witches vanish.
  BANQUO. The earth hath bubbles as the water has,
    And these are of them. Whither are they vanish'd?
  MACBETH. Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted
    As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!
  BANQUO. Were such things here as we do speak about?
    Or have we eaten on the insane root
    That takes the reason prisoner?
  MACBETH. Your children shall be kings.
  BANQUO. You shall be King.
  MACBETH. And Thane of Cawdor too. Went it not so?
  BANQUO. To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?

                Enter Ross and Angus.
  
  ROSS. The King hath happily received, Macbeth,
    The news of thy success; and when he reads
    Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
    His wonders and his praises do contend
    Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that,
    In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,
    He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
    Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
    Strange images of death. As thick as hail
    Came post with post, and every one did bear
    Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense,
    And pour'd them down before him.
  ANGUS. We are sent
    To give thee, from our royal master, thanks;
    Only to herald thee into his sight,
    Not pay thee.
  ROSS. And for an earnest of a greater honor,
    He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor.
    In which addition, hail, most worthy Thane,
    For it is thine.  
  BANQUO. What, can the devil speak true?
  MACBETH. The Thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me
    In borrow'd robes?
  ANGUS. Who was the Thane lives yet,
    But under heavy judgement bears that life
    Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined
    With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
    With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
    He labor'd in his country's wreck, I know not;
    But treasons capital, confess'd and proved,
    Have overthrown him.
  MACBETH. [Aside.] Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor!
    The greatest is behind. [To Ross and Angus] Thanks for your
      pains.
    [Aside to Banquo] Do you not hope your children shall be kings,
    When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
    Promised no less to them?
  BANQUO. [Aside to Macbeth.] That, trusted home,
    Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
    Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange;  
    And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
    The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
    Win us with honest trifles,