 'twixt will and will not.
  ANGELO. Well; the matter?
  ISABELLA. I have a brother is condemn'd to die;
    I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
    And not my brother.  
  PROVOST. [Aside] Heaven give thee moving graces.
  ANGELO. Condemn the fault and not the actor of it!
    Why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done;
    Mine were the very cipher of a function,
    To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
    And let go by the actor.
  ISABELLA. O just but severe law!
    I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Give't not o'er so; to him again, entreat him,
    Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
    You are too cold: if you should need a pin,
    You could not with more tame a tongue desire it.
    To him, I say.
  ISABELLA. Must he needs die?
  ANGELO. Maiden, no remedy.
  ISABELLA. Yes; I do think that you might pardon him.
    And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
  ANGELO. I will not do't.
  ISABELLA. But can you, if you would?
  ANGELO. Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.  
  ISABELLA. But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
    If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse
    As mine is to him?
  ANGELO. He's sentenc'd; 'tis too late.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] You are too cold.
  ISABELLA. Too late? Why, no; I, that do speak a word,
    May call it back again. Well, believe this:
    No ceremony that to great ones longs,
    Not the king's crown nor the deputed sword,
    The marshal's truncheon nor the judge's robe,
    Become them with one half so good a grace
    As mercy does.
    If he had been as you, and you as he,
    You would have slipp'd like him; but he, like you,
    Would not have been so stern.
  ANGELO. Pray you be gone.
  ISABELLA. I would to heaven I had your potency,
    And you were Isabel! Should it then be thus?
    No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge
    And what a prisoner.  
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Ay, touch him; there's the vein.
  ANGELO. Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
    And you but waste your words.
  ISABELLA. Alas! Alas!
    Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once;
    And He that might the vantage best have took
    Found out the remedy. How would you be
    If He, which is the top of judgment, should
    But judge you as you are? O, think on that;
    And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
    Like man new made.
  ANGELO. Be you content, fair maid.
    It is the law, not I condemn your brother.
    Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
    It should be thus with him. He must die to-morrow.
  ISABELLA. To-morrow! O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him.
    He's not prepar'd for death. Even for our kitchens
    We kill the fowl of season; shall we serve heaven
    With less respect than we do minister
    To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you.  
    Who is it that hath died for this offence?
    There's many have committed it.
  LUCIO. [Aside] Ay, well said.
  ANGELO. The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.
    Those many had not dar'd to do that evil
    If the first that did th' edict infringe
    Had answer'd for his deed. Now 'tis awake,
    Takes note of what is done, and, like a prophet,
    Looks in a glass that shows what future evils-
    Either now or by remissness new conceiv'd,
    And so in progress to be hatch'd and born-
    Are now to have no successive degrees,
    But here they live to end.
  ISABELLA. Yet show some pity.
  ANGELO. I show it most of all when I show justice;
    For then I pity those I do not know,
    Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall,
    And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
    Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
    Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.  
  ISABELLA. So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
    And he that suffers. O, it is excellent
    To have a giant's strength! But it is tyrannous
    To use it like a giant.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] That's well said.
  ISABELLA. Could great men thunder
    As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet,
    For every pelting petty officer
    Would use his heaven for thunder,
    Nothing but thunder. Merciful Heaven,
    Thou rather, with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt,
    Splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
    Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man,
    Dress'd in a little brief authority,
    Most ignorant of what he's most assur'd,
    His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
    Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
    As makes the angels weep; who, with our speens,
    Would all themselves laugh mortal.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] O, to him, to him, wench! He will relent;  
    He's coming; I perceive 't.
  PROVOST. [Aside] Pray heaven she win him.
  ISABELLA. We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
    Great men may jest with saints: 'tis wit in them;
    But in the less foul profanation.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Thou'rt i' th' right, girl; more o' that.
  ISABELLA. That in the captain's but a choleric word
    Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Art avis'd o' that? More on't.
  ANGELO. Why do you put these sayings upon me?
  ISABELLA. Because authority, though it err like others,
    Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself
    That skins the vice o' th' top. Go to your bosom,
    Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
    That's like my brother's fault. If it confess
    A natural guiltiness such as is his,
    Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
    Against my brother's life.
  ANGELO. [Aside] She speaks, and 'tis
    Such sense that my sense breeds with it.- Fare you well.  
  ISABELLA. Gentle my lord, turn back.
  ANGELO. I will bethink me. Come again to-morrow.
  ISABELLA. Hark how I'll bribe you; good my lord, turn back.
  ANGELO. How, bribe me?
  ISABELLA. Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA) You had marr'd all else.
  ISABELLA. Not with fond sicles of the tested gold,
    Or stones, whose rate are either rich or poor
    As fancy values them; but with true prayers
    That shall be up at heaven and enter there
    Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
    From fasting maids, whose minds are dedicate
    To nothing temporal.
  ANGELO. Well; come to me to-morrow.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Go to; 'tis well; away.
  ISABELLA. Heaven keep your honour safe!
  ANGELO. [Aside] Amen; for I
    Am that way going to temptation
    Where prayers cross.
  ISABELLA. At what hour to-morrow  
    Shall I attend your lordship?
  ANGELO. At any time 'fore noon.
  ISABELLA. Save your honour!              Exeunt all but ANGELO
  ANGELO. From thee; even from thy virtue!
    What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or mine?
    The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
    Ha!
    Not she; nor doth she tempt; but it is I
    That, lying by the violet in the sun,
    Do as the carrion does, not as the flow'r,
    Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
    That modesty may more betray our sense
    Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough,
    Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary,
    And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
    What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
    Dost thou desire her foully for those things
    That make her good? O, let her brother live!
    Thieves for their robbery have authority
    When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,  
    That I desire to hear her speak again,
    And feast upon her eyes? What is't I dream on?
    O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
    With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
    Is that temptation that doth goad us on
    To sin in loving virtue. Never could the strumpet,
    With all her double vigour, art and nature,
    Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
    Subdues me quite. Ever till now,
    When men were fond, I smil'd and wond'red how.          Exit




SCENE III.
A prison

Enter, severally, DUKE, disguised as a FRIAR, and PROVOST

  DUKE. Hail to you, Provost! so I think you are.
  PROVOST. I am the Provost. What's your will, good friar?
  DUKE. Bound by my charity and my blest order,
    I come to visit the afflicted spirits
    Here in the prison. Do me the common right
    To let me see them, and to make me know
    The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
    To them accordingly.
  PROVOST. I would do more than that, if more were needful.

                          Enter JULIET

    Look, here comes one; a gentlewoman of mine,
    Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
    Hath blister'd her report. She is with child;
    And he that got it, sentenc'd- a young man
    More fit to do another such offence  
    Than die for this.
  DUKE. When must he die?
  PROVOST. As I do think, to-morrow.
    [To JULIET] I have provided for you; stay awhile
    And you shall be conducted.
  DUKE. Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
  JULIET. I do; and bear the shame most patiently.
  DUKE. I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
    And try your penitence, if it be sound
    Or hollowly put on.
  JULIET. I'll gladly learn.
  DUKE. Love you the man that wrong'd you?
  JULIET. Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.
  DUKE. So then, it seems, your most offenceful act
    Was mutually committed.
  JULIET. Mutually.
  DUKE. Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
  JULIET. I do confess it, and repent it, father.
  DUKE. 'Tis meet so, daughter; but lest you do repent
    As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,  
    Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven,
    Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
    But as we stand in fear-
  JULIET. I do repent me as it is an evil,
    And take the shame with joy.
  DUKE. There rest.
    Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow,
    And I am going with instruction to him.
    Grace go with you! Benedicite!                          Exit
  JULIET. Must die to-morrow! O, injurious law,
    That respites me a life whose very comfort
    Is still a dying horror!
  PROVOST. 'Tis pity of him.                              Exeunt




SCENE IV.
ANGELO'S house

Enter ANGELO

  ANGELO. When I would pray and think, I think and pray
    To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words,
    Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
    Anchors on Isabel. Heaven in my mouth,
    As if I did but only chew his name,
    And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
    Of my conception. The state whereon I studied
    Is, like a good thing being often read,
    Grown sere and tedious; yea, my gravity,
    Wherein- let no man hear me- I take pride,
    Could I with boot change for an idle plume
    Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
    How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
    Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
    To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood.
    Let's write 'good angel' on the devil's horn;
    'Tis not the devil's crest.  

                           Enter SERVANT

    How now, who's there?
  SERVANT. One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
  ANGELO. Teach her the way. [Exit SERVANT] O heavens!
    Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
    Making both it unable for itself
    And dispossessing all my other parts
    Of necessary fitness?
    So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
    Come all to help him, and so stop the air
    By which he should revive; and even so
    The general subject to a well-wish'd king
    Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
    Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
    Must needs appear offence.

                            Enter ISABELLA
  
    How now, fair maid?
  ISABELLA. I am come to know your pleasure.
  ANGELO. That you might know it would much better please me
    Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.
  ISABELLA. Even so! Heaven keep your honour!
  ANGELO. Yet may he live awhile, and, it may be,
    As long as you or I; yet he must die.
  ISABELLA. Under your sentence?
  ANGELO. Yea.
  ISABELLA. When? I beseech you; that in his reprieve,
    Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
    That his soul sicken not.
  ANGELO. Ha! Fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
    To pardon him that hath from nature stol'n
    A man already made, as to remit
    Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image
    In stamps that are forbid; 'tis all as easy
    Falsely to take away a life true made
    As to put metal in restrained means
    To make a false one.  
  ISABELLA. 'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
  ANGELO. Say you so? Then I shall pose you quickly.
    Which had you rather- that the most just law
    Now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him,
    Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
    As she that he hath stain'd?
  ISABELLA. Sir, believe this:
    I had rather give my body than my soul.
  ANGELO. I talk not of your soul; our compell'd sins
    Stand more for number than for accompt.
  ISABELLA. How say you?
  ANGELO. Nay, I'll not warrant that; for I can speak
    Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
    I, now the voice of the recorded law,
    Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life;
    Might there not be a charity in sin
    To save this brother's life?
  ISABELLA. Please you to do't,
    I'll take it as a peril to my soul
    It is no sin at all, but charity.  
  ANGELO. Pleas'd you to do't at peril of your soul,
    Were equal poise of sin and charity.
  ISABELLA. That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
    Heaven let me bear it! You granting of my suit,
    If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer
    To have it added to the faults of mine,
    And nothing of your answer.
  ANGELO. Nay, but hear me;
    Your sense pursues not mine; either you are ignorant
    Or seem so, craftily; and that's not good.
  ISABELLA. Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good
    But graciously to know I am no better.
  ANGELO. Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
    When it doth tax itself; as these black masks
    Proclaim an enshielded beauty ten times louder
    Than beauty could, display'd. But mark me:
    To be received plain, I'll speak more gross-
    Your brother is to die.
  ISABELLA. So.
  ANGELO. And his offence is so, as it appears,  
    Accountant to the law upon that pain.
  ISABELLA. True.
  ANGELO. Admit no other way to save his life,
    As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
    But, in the loss of question, that you, his sister,
    Finding yourself desir'd of such a person
    Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
    Could fetch your brother from the manacles
    Of the all-binding law; and that there were
    No earthly mean to save him but that either
    You must lay down the treasures of your body
    To this supposed, or else to let him suffer-
    What would you do?
  ISABELLA. As much for my poor brother as myself;
    That is, were I under the terms of death,
    Th' impression of keen whips I'd wear as rubies,
    And strip myself to death as to a bed
    That longing have been sick for, ere I'd yield
    My body up to shame.
  ANGELO. Then must your brother die.  
  ISABELLA. And 'twere the cheaper way:
    Better it were a brother died at once
    Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
    Should die for ever.
  ANGELO. Were not you, then, as cruel as the sentence
    That you have slander'd so?
  ISABELLA. Ignominy in ransom and free pardon
    Are of two houses: lawful mercy
    Is nothing kin to foul redemption.
  ANGELO. You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant;
    And rather prov'd the sliding of your brother
    A merriment than a vice.
  ISABELLA. O, pardon me, my lord! It oft falls out,
    To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean:
    I something do excuse the thing I hate
    For his advantage that I dearly love.
  ANGELO. We are all frail.
  ISABELLA. Else let my brother die,
    If not a fedary but only he
    Owe and succeed thy weakness.  
  ANGELO. Nay, women are frail too.
  ISABELLA. Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,
    Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
    Women, help heaven! Men their creation mar
    In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
    For we are soft as our complexions are,
    And credulous to false prints.
  ANGELO. I think it well;
    And from this testimony of your own sex,
    Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
    Than faults may shake our frames, let me be bold.
    I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
    That is, a woman; if you be more, you're none;
    If you be one, as you are well express'd
    By all external warrants, show it now
    By putting on the destin'd livery.
  ISABELLA. I have no tongue but one; gentle, my lord,
    Let me intreat you speak the former language.
  ANGELO. Plainly conceive, I love you.
  ISABELLA. My brother did love Juliet,  
    And you tell me that he shall die for't.
  ANGELO. He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.
  ISABELLA. I know your virtue hath a license in't,
    Which seems a little fouler than it is,
    To pluck on others.
  ANGELO. Believe me, on mine honour,
    My words express my purpose.
  ISABELLA. Ha! little honour to be much believ'd,
    And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
    I will proclaim thee, Angelo, look for't.
    Sign me a present pardon for my brother
    Or, with an outstretch'd throat, I'll tell the world aloud
    What man thou art.
  ANGELO. Who will believe thee, Isabel?
    My unsoil'd name, th' austereness of my life,
    My vouch against you, and my place i' th' state,
    Will so your accusation overweigh
    That you shall stifle in your own report,
    And smell of calumny. I have begun,
    And now I give my sensual race the rein:  
    Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
    Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes
    That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother
    By yielding up thy body to my will;
    Or else he must not only die the death,
    But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
    To ling'ring sufferance. Answer me to-morrow,
    Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
    I'll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
    Say what you can: my false o'erweighs your true.        Exit
  ISABELLA. To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
    Who would believe me? O perilous mouths
    That bear in them one and the self-same tongue
    Either of condemnation or approof,
    Bidding the law make curtsy to their will;
    Hooking both right and wrong to th' appetite,
    To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother.
    Though he hath fall'n by prompture of the blood,
    Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour
    That, had he twenty heads to tender down  
    On twenty bloody blocks, he'd yield them up
    Before his sister should her body stoop
    To such abhorr'd pollution.
    Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die:
    More than our brother is our chastity.
    I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request,
    And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.         Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
The prison

Enter DUKE, disguised as before, CLAUDIO, and PROVOST

  DUKE. So, then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
  CLAUDIO. The miserable have no other medicine
    But only hope:
    I have hope to Eve, and am prepar'd to die.
  DUKE. Be absolute for death; either death or life
    Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life.
    If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
    That none but fools would keep. A breath thou art,
    Servile to all the skyey influences,
    That dost this habitation where thou keep'st
    Hourly afflict. Merely, thou art Death's fool;
    For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun
    And yet run'st toward him still. Thou art not noble;
    For all th' accommodations that thou bear'st
    Are nurs'd by baseness. Thou 'rt by no means valiant;
    For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
    Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,  
    And that thou oft provok'st; yet grossly fear'st
    Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
    For thou exists on many a thousand grains
    That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
    For what thou hast not, still thou striv'st to get,
    And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain;
    For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
    After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor;
    For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
    Thou bear'st thy heavy riches but a journey,
    And Death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
    For thine own bowels which do call thee sire,
    The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
    Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,
    For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
    But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
    Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
    Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
    Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
    Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,  
    To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this
    That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
    Lie hid moe thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
    That makes these odds all even.
  CLAUDIO. I humbly thank you.
    To sue to live, I find I seek to die;
    And, seeking death, find life. Let it come on.
  ISABELLA. [Within] What, ho! Peace here; grace and good company!
  PROVOST. Who's there? Come in; the wish deserves a welcome.
  DUKE. Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.
  CLAUDIO. Most holy sir, I thank you.

                        Enter ISABELLA

  ISABELLA. My business is a word or two with Claudio.
  PROVOST. And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.
  DUKE. Provost, a word with you.
  PROVOST. As many as you please.
  DUKE. Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be conceal'd.
                                         Exeunt DUKE and PROVOST  
  CLAUDIO. Now, sister, what's the comfort?
  ISABELLA. Why,
    As all comforts are; most good, most good, indeed.
    Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
    Intends you for his swift ambassador,
    Where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
    Therefore, your best appointment make with speed;
    To-morrow you set on.
  CLAUDIO. Is there no remedy?
  ISABELLA. None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
    To cleave a heart in twain.
  CLAUDIO. But is there any?
  ISABELLA. Yes, brother, you may live:
    There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
    If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
    But fetter you till death.
  CLAUDIO. Perpetual durance?
  ISABELLA. Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
    Though all the world's vastidity you had,
    To a determin'd scope.  
  CLAUDIO. But in what nature?
  ISABELLA. In such a one as, you consenting to't,
    Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
    And leave you naked.
  CLAUDIO. Let me know the point.
  ISABELLA. O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake,
    Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
    And six or seven winters more respect
    Than a perpetual honour. Dar'st thou die?
    The sense of death is most in apprehension;
    And the poor beetle that we tread upon
    In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
    As when a giant dies.
  CLAUDIO. Why give you me this shame?
    Think you I can a resolution fetch
    From flow'ry tenderness? If I must die,
    I will encounter darkness as a bride
    And hug it in mine arms.
  ISABELLA. There spake my brother; there my father's grave
    Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:  
    Thou art too noble to conserve a life
    In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
    Whose settled visage and deliberate word
    Nips youth i' th' head, and follies doth enew
    As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil;
    His filth within being cast, he would appear
    A pond as deep as hell.
  CLAUDIO. The precise Angelo!
  ISABELLA. O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell
    The damned'st body to invest and cover
    In precise guards! Dost thou think, Claudio,
    If I would yield him my virginity
    Thou mightst be freed?
  CLAUDIO. O heavens! it cannot be.
  ISABELLA. Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
    So to offend him still. This night's the time
    That I should do what I abhor to name,
    Or else thou diest to-morrow.
  CLAUDIO. Thou shalt not do't.
  ISABELLA. O, were it but my life!  
    I'd throw it down for your deliverance
    As frankly as a pin.
  CLAUDIO. Thanks, dear Isabel.
  ISABELLA. Be ready, Claudio, for your death to-morrow.
  CLAUDIO. Yes. Has he affections in him
    That thus can make him bite the law by th' nose
    When he would force it? Sure it is no sin;
    Or of the deadly seven it is the least.
  ISABELLA. Which is the least?
  CLAUDIO. If it were damnable, he being so wise,
    Why would he for the momentary trick
    Be perdurably fin'd?- O Isabel!
  ISABELLA. What says my brother?
  CLAUDIO. Death is a fearful thing.
  ISABELLA. And shamed life a hateful.
  CLAUDIO. Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
    To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
    This sensible warm motion to become
    A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
    To bathe in fiery floods or to reside  
    In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
    To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
    And blown with restless violence round about
    The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
    Of those that lawless and incertain thought
    Imagine howling- 'tis too horrible.
    The weariest and most loathed worldly life
    That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment,
    Can lay on nature is a paradise
    To what we fear of death.
  ISABELLA. Alas, alas!
  CLAUDIO. Sweet sister, let me live.
    What sin you do to save a brother's life,
    Nature dispenses with the deed so far
    That it becomes a virtue.
  ISABELLA. O you beast!
    O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
    Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
    Is't not a kind of incest to take life
    From thine own sister's shame? What should I think?  
    Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
    For such a warped slip of wilderness
    Ne'er issu'd from his blood. Take my defiance;
    Die; perish. Might but my bending down
    Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
    I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
    No word to save thee.
  CLAUDIO. Nay, hear me, Isabel.
  ISABELLA. O fie, fie, fie!
    Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
    Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd;
    'Tis best that thou diest quickly.
  CLAUDIO. O, hear me, Isabella.

                            Re-enter DUKE

  DUKE. Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
  ISABELLA. What is your will?
  DUKE. Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have
    some speech with you; the satisfaction I would require is  
    likewise your own benefit.
  ISABELLA. I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen out
    of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.
                                                   [Walks apart]
  DUKE. Son, I have overheard what hath pass'd between you and your
    sister. Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only he hath
    made an assay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the
    disposition of natures. She, having the truth of honour in her,
    hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to
    receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true;
    therefore prepare yourself to death. Do not satisfy your
    resolution with hopes that are fallible; to-morrow you must die;
    go to your knees and make ready.
  CLAUDIO. Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love with life
    that I will sue to be rid of it.
  DUKE. Hold you there. Farewell. [Exit CLAUDIO] Provost, a word with
    you.

                          Re-enter PROVOST
  
  PROVOST. What's your will, father?
  DUKE. That, now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me a while
    with the maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch
    her by my company.
  PROVOST. In good time.                            Exit PROVOST
  DUKE. The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good; the
    goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness;
    but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body
    of it ever fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
    fortune hath convey'd to my understanding; and, but that frailty
    hath examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo. How
    will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?
  ISABELLA. I am now going to resolve him; I had rather my brother
    die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born. But, O, how
    much is the good Duke deceiv'd in Angelo! If ever he return, and
    I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his
    government.
  DUKE. That shall not be much amiss; yet, as the matter now stands,
    he will avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only.
    Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings; to the love I have in  
    doing good a remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe
    that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited
    benefit; redeem your brother from the angry law; do no stain to
    your own gracious person; and much please the absent Duke, if
    peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this
    business.
  ISABELLA. Let me hear you speak farther; I have spirit to do
    anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
  DUKE. Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have you not
    heard speak of Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great
    soldier who miscarried at sea?
  ISABELLA. I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her
    name.
  DUKE. She should this Angelo have married; was affianced to her by
    oath, and the nuptial appointed; between which time of the
    contract and limit of the solemnity her brother Frederick was
    wreck'd at sea, having in that perished vessel the dowry of his
    sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman:
    there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward
    her ever most kind and natural; with him the portion and sinew of  
    her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her combinate
    husband, this well-seeming Angelo.
  ISABELLA. Can this be so? Did Angelo so leave her?
  DUKE. Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his
    comfort; swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries
    of dishonour; in few, bestow'd her on her own lamentation, which
    she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is
    washed with them, but relents not.
  ISABELLA. What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from
    the world! What corruption in this life that it will let this man
    live! But how out of this can she avail?
  DUKE. It is a rupture that you may easily heal; and the cure of it
    not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in
    doing it.
  ISABELLA. Show me how, good father.
  DUKE. This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her
    first affection; his unjust unkindness, that in all reason should
    have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current,
    made it more violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his
    requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with his demands to  
    the point; only refer yourself to this advantage: first, that
    your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all
    shadow and silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.
    This being granted in course- and now follows all: we shall
    advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your
    place. If the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may
    compel him to her recompense; and here, by this, is your brother
    saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged, and
    the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for
    his attempt. If you think well to carry this as you may, the
    doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What
    think you of it?
  ISABELLA. The image of it gives me content already; and I trust it
    will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
  DUKE. It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily to
    Angelo; if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him
    promise of satisfaction. I will presently to Saint Luke's; there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
    place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be
    quickly.  
  ISABELLA. I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.
                                                Exeunt severally




Scene II.
The street before the prison

Enter, on one side, DUKE disguised as before; on the other, ELBOW,
and OFFICERS with POMPEY

  ELBOW. Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the
    world drink brown and white bastard.
  DUKE. O heavens! what stuff is here?
  POMPEY. 'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    gown to keep him warm; and furr'd with fox on lamb-skins too, to
    signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the
    facing.
  ELBOW. Come your way, sir. Bless you, good father friar.
  DUKE. And you, good brother father. What offence hath this man made
    you, sir?
  ELBOW. Marry, sir, he hath offended the law; and, sir, we take him
    to be a thief too, sir, for we have found upon him, sir, a
    strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
  DUKE. Fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd!  
    The evil that thou causest to be done,
    That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
    What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
    From such a filthy vice; say to thyself
    'From their abominable and beastly touches
    I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.'
    Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
    So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
  POMPEY. Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir,
    I would prove-
  DUKE. Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
    Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer;
    Correction and instruction must both work
    Ere this rude beast will profit.
  ELBOW. He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning.
    The deputy cannot abide a whoremaster; if he be a whoremonger,
    and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.
  DUKE. That we were all, as some would seem to be,
    From our faults, as his faults from seeming, free.
  ELBOW. His neck will come to your waist- a cord, sir.  

                          Enter LUCIO

  POMPEY. I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here's a gentleman, and a friend
    of mine.
  LUCIO. How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art
    thou led in triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion's images,
    newly made woman, to be had now for putting the hand in the
    pocket and extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What say'st
    thou to this tune, matter, and method? Is't not drown'd i' th'
    last rain, ha? What say'st thou, trot? Is the world as it was,
    man? Which is the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
    trick of it?
  DUKE. Still thus, and thus; still worse!
  LUCIO. How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she still,
    ha?
  POMPEY. Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so; ever
    your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd  
    consequence; it must be so. Art going to prison, Pompey?
  POMPEY. Yes, faith, sir.
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell; go, say I sent thee
    thither. For debt, Pompey- or how?
  ELBOW. For being a bawd, for being a bawd.
  LUCIO. Well, then, imprison him. If imprisonment be the due of a
    bawd, why, 'tis his right. Bawd is he doubtless, and of
    antiquity, too; bawd-born. Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to
    the prison, Pompey. You will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
    will keep the house.
  POMPEY. I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
  LUCIO. No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will
    pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage. If you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. Adieu trusty Pompey.
    Bless you, friar.
  DUKE. And you.
  LUCIO. Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?
  ELBOW. Come your ways, sir; come.
  POMPEY. You will not bail me then, sir?
  LUCIO. Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar? what news?  
  ELBOW. Come your ways, sir; come.
  LUCIO. Go to kennel, Pompey, go.

                               Exeunt ELBOW, POMPEY and OFFICERS

    What news, friar, of the Duke?
  DUKE. I know none. Can you tell me of any?
  LUCIO. Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is
    in Rome; but where is he, think you?
  DUKE. I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.
  LUCIO. It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  DUKE. He does well in't.
  LUCIO. A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him;
    something too crabbed that way, friar.
  DUKE. It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
  LUCIO. Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is
    well allied; but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till
    eating and drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not  
    made by man and woman after this downright way of creation. Is it
    true, think you?
  DUKE. How should he be made, then?
  LUCIO. Some report a sea-maid spawn'd him; some, that he was begot
    between two stock-fishes. But it is certain that when he makes
    water his urine is congeal'd ice; that I know to be true. And he
    is a motion generative; that's infallible.
  DUKE. You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
  LUCIO. Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion
    of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the Duke that
    is absent have done this? Ere he would have hang'd a man for the
    getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a
    thousand. He had some feeling of the sport; he knew the service,
    and that instructed him to mercy.
  DUKE. I never heard the absent Duke much detected for women; he was
    not inclin'd that way.
  LUCIO. O, sir, you are deceiv'd.
  DUKE. 'Tis not possible.
  LUCIO. Who- not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use
    was to put a ducat in her clack-dish. The Duke had crotchets in  
    him. He would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
  DUKE. You do him wrong, surely.
  LUCIO. Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the Duke; and
    I believe I know the cause of his withdrawing.
  DUKE. What, I prithee, might be the cause?
  LUCIO. No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be lock'd within the teeth
    and the lips; but this I can let you understand: the greater file
    of the subject held the Duke to be wise.
  DUKE. Wise? Why, no question but he was.
  LUCIO. A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
  DUKE. Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking; the very
    stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed, must, upon a
    warranted need, give him a better proclamation. Let him be but
    testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to
    the envious a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. Therefore you
    speak unskilfully; or, if your knowledge be more, it is much
    dark'ned in your malice.
  LUCIO. Sir, I know him, and I love him.
  DUKE. Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer
    love.  
  LUCIO. Come, sir, I know what I know.
  DUKE. I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak.
    But, if ever the Duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me
    desire you to make your answer before him. If it be honest you
    have spoke, you have courage to maintain it; I am bound to call
    upon you; and I pray you your name?
  LUCIO. Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.
  DUKE. He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.
  LUCIO. I fear you not.
  DUKE. O, you hope the Duke will return no more; or you imagine me
    too unhurtful an opposite. But, indeed, I can do you little harm:
    you'll forswear this again.
  LUCIO. I'll be hang'd first. Thou art deceiv'd in me, friar. But no
    more of this. Canst thou tell if Claudio die to-morrow or no?
  DUKE. Why should he die, sir?
  LUCIO. Why? For filling a bottle with a tun-dish. I would the Duke
    we talk of were return'd again. This ungenitur'd agent will
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous. The Duke yet would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to  
    light. Would he were return'd! Marry, this Claudio is condemned
    for untrussing. Farewell, good friar; I prithee pray for me. The
    Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He's not
    past it yet; and, I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic. Say that I said so.
    Farewell.                                               Exit
  DUKE. No might nor greatness in mortality
    Can censure scape; back-wounding calumny
    The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
    Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
    But who comes here?

             Enter ESCALUS, PROVOST, and OFFICERS with
                           MISTRESS OVERDONE

  ESCALUS. Go, away with her to prison.
  MRS. OVERDONE. Good my lord, be good to me; your honour is
    accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
  ESCALUS. Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! This would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.  
  PROVOST. A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please your
    honour.
  MRS. OVERDONE. My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.
    Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the Duke's time;
    he promis'd her marriage. His child is a year and a quarter old
    come Philip and Jacob; I have kept it myself; and see how he goes
    about to abuse me.
  ESCALUS. That fellow is a fellow of much license. Let him be call'd
    before us. Away with her to prison. Go to; no more words. [Exeunt
    OFFICERS with MISTRESS OVERDONE]  Provost, my brother Angelo will
    not be alter'd: Claudio must die to-morrow. Let him be furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. If my brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  PROVOST. So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.
  ESCALUS. Good even, good father.
  DUKE. Bliss and goodness on you!
  ESCALUS. Of whence are you?
  DUKE. Not of this country, though my chance is now
    To use it for my time. I am a brother  
    Of gracious order, late come from the See
    In special business from his Holiness.
  ESCALUS. What news abroad i' th' world?
  DUKE. None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the
    dissolution of it must cure it. Novelty is only in request; and,
    as it is, as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it is
    virtuous to be constant in any undertakeing. There is scarce
    truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security enough
    to make fellowships accurst. Much upon this riddle runs the
    wisdom of the world. This news is old enough, yet it is every
    day's news. I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the Duke?
  ESCALUS. One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to
    know himself.
  DUKE. What pleasure was he given to?
  ESCALUS. Rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at
    anything which profess'd to make him rejoice; a gentleman of all
    temperance. But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they
    may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find
    Claudio prepar'd. I am made to understand that you have lent him
    visitation.  
  DUKE. He professes to have received no sinister measure from his
    judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of
    justice. Yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of his
    frailty, many deceiving promises of life; which I, by my good
    leisure, have discredited to him, and now he is resolv'd to die.
  ESCALUS. You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner
    the very debt of your calling. I have labour'd for the poor
    gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty; but my brother
    justice have I found so severe that he hath forc'd me to tell him
    he is indeed Justice.
  DUKE. If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it
    shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath
    sentenc'd himself.
  ESCALUS. I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.
  DUKE. Peace be with you!            Exeunt ESCALUS and PROVOST

         He who the sword of heaven will bear
         Should be as holy as severe;
         Pattern in himself to know,
         Grace to stand, and virtue go;  
         More nor less to others paying
         Than by self-offences weighing.
         Shame to him whose cruel striking
         Kills for faults of his own liking!
         Twice treble shame on Angelo,
         To weed my vice and let his grow!
         O, what may man within him hide,
         Though angel on the outward side!
         How may likeness, made in crimes,
         Make a practice on the times,
         To draw with idle spiders' strings
         Most ponderous and substantial things!
         Craft against vice I must apply.
         With Angelo to-night shall lie
         His old betrothed but despised;
         So disguise shall, by th' disguised,
         Pay with falsehood false exacting,
         And perform an old contracting.                    Exit




Act IV. Scene I.
The moated grange at Saint Duke's

Enter MARIANA; and BOY singing

                             SONG

           Take, O, take those lips away,
             That so sweetly were forsworn;
           And those eyes, the break of day,
             Lights that do mislead the morn;
           But my kisses bring again, bring again;
           Seals of love, but seal'd in vain, seal'd in vain.

                  Enter DUKE, disguised as before

  MARIANA. Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away;
    Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
    Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.          Exit BOY
    I cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish
    You had not found me here so musical.
    Let me excuse me, and believe me so,  
    My mirth it much displeas'd, but pleas'd my woe.
  DUKE. 'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
    To make bad good and good provoke to harm.
    I pray you tell me hath anybody inquir'd for me here to-day. Much
    upon this time have I promis'd here to meet.
  MARIANA. You have not been inquir'd after; I have sat here all day.

                         Enter ISABELLA

  DUKE. I do constantly believe you. The time is come even now. I
    shall crave your forbearance a little. May be I will call upon
    you anon, for some advantage to yourself.
  MARIANA. I am always bound to you.                        Exit
  DUKE. Very well met, and well come.
    What is the news from this good deputy?
  ISABELLA. He hath a garden circummur'd with brick,
    Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd;
    And to that vineyard is a planched gate
    That makes his opening with this bigger key;
    This other doth command a little door  
    Which from the vineyard to the garden leads.
    There have I made my promise
    Upon the heavy middle of the night
    To call upon him.
  DUKE. But shall you on your knowledge find this way?
  ISABELLA. I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't;
    With whispering and most guilty diligence,
    In action all of precept, he did show me
    The way twice o'er.
  DUKE. Are there no other tokens
    Between you 'greed concerning her observance?
  ISABELLA. No, none, but only a repair i' th' dark;
    And that I have possess'd him my most stay
    Can be but brief; for I have made him know
    I have a servant comes with me along,
    That stays upon me; whose persuasion is
    I come about my brother.
  DUKE. 'Tis well borne up.
    I have not yet made known to Mariana
    A word of this. What ho, within! come forth.  

                       Re-enter MARIANA

    I pray you be acquainted with this maid;
    She comes to do you good.
  ISABELLA. I do desire the like.
  DUKE. Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?
  MARIANA. Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.
  DUKE. Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
    Who hath a story ready for your ear.
    I shall attend your leisure; but make haste;
    The vaporous night approaches.
  MARIANA. Will't please you walk aside?
                                     Exeunt MARIANA and ISABELLA
  DUKE. O place and greatness! Millions of false eyes
    Are stuck upon thee. Volumes of report
    Run with these false, and most contrarious quest
    Upon thy doings. Thousand escapes of wit
    Make thee the father of their idle dream,
    And rack thee in their fancies.  

                 Re-enter MARIANA and ISABELLA

    Welcome, how agreed?
  ISABELLA. She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
    If you advise it.
  DUKE. It is not my consent,
    But my entreaty too.
  ISABELLA. Little have you to say,
    When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
    'Remember now my brother.'
  MARIANA. Fear me not.
  DUKE. Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
    He is your husband on a pre-contract.
    To bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
    Sith that the justice of your title to him
    Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go;
    Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.       Exeunt




SCENE II.
The prison

Enter PROVOST and POMPEY

  PROVOST. Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?
  POMPEY. If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
    married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never cut of a
    woman's head.
  PROVOST. Come, sir, leave me your snatches and yield me a direct
    answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here
    is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a
    helper; if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem
    you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of
    imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for
    you have been a notorious bawd.
  POMPEY. Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; but yet
    I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I would be glad to
    receive some instructions from my fellow partner.
  PROVOST. What ho, Abhorson! Where's Abhorson there?

                          Enter ABHORSON  

  ABHORSON. Do you call, sir?
  PROVOST. Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your
    execution. If you think it meet, compound with him by the year,
    and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present,
    and dismiss him. He cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath
    been a bawd.
  ABHORSON. A bawd, sir? Fie upon him! He will discredit our mystery.
  PROVOST. Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn the
    scale.                                                  Exit
  POMPEY. Pray, sir, by your good favour- for surely, sir, a good
    favour you have but that you have a hanging look- do you call,
    sir, your occupation a mystery?
  ABHORSON. Ay, sir; a mystery.
  POMPEY. Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your
    whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do
    prove my occupation a mystery; but what mystery there should be
    in hanging, if I should be hang'd, I cannot imagine.
  ABHORSON. Sir, it is a mystery.
  POMPEY. Proof?  
  ABHORSON. Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be too
    little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if it
    be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little enough; so
    every true man's apparel fits your thief.

                          Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Are you agreed?
  POMPEY. Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is a more
    penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask forgiveness.
  PROVOST. You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow
    four o'clock.
  ABHORSON. Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.
  POMPEY. I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you have occasion
    to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for truly,
    sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.
  PROVOST. Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.
                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY
    Th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    Being a murderer, though he were my brother.  

                           Enter CLAUDIO

    Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death;
    'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
    Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?
  CLAUDIO. As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
    When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones.
    He will not wake.
  PROVOST. Who can do good on him?
    Well, go, prepare yourself. [Knocking within] But hark, what
      noise?
    Heaven give your spirits comfort!               Exit CLAUDIO
    [Knocking continues] By and by.
    I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
    For the most gentle Claudio.

                 Enter DUKE, disguised as before

    Welcome, father.  
  DUKE. The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
    Envelop you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?
  PROVOST. None, since the curfew rung.
  DUKE. Not Isabel?
  PROVOST. No.
  DUKE. They will then, ere't be long.
  PROVOST. What comfort is for Claudio?
  DUKE. There's some in hope.
  PROVOST. It is a bitter deputy.
  DUKE. Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
    Even with the stroke and line of his great justice;
    He doth with holy abstinence subdue
    That in himself which he spurs on his pow'r
    To qualify in others. Were he meal'd with that
    Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
    But this being so, he's just. [Knocking within] Now are they
      come.                                         Exit PROVOST
    This is a gentle provost; seldom when
    The steeled gaoler is the friend of men. [Knocking within]
    How now, what noise! That spirit's possess'd with haste  
    That wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.

                        Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. There he must stay until the officer
    Arise to let him in; he is call'd up.
  DUKE. Have you no countermand for Claudio yet
    But he must die to-morrow?
  PROVOST. None, sir, none.
  DUKE. As near the dawning, Provost, as it is,
    You shall hear more ere morning.
  PROVOST. Happily
    You something know; yet I believe there comes
    No countermand; no such example have we.
    Besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
    Profess'd the contrary.

                         Enter a MESSENGER  
    This is his lordship's man.
  DUKE. And here comes Claudio's pardon.
  MESSENGER. My lord hath sent you this note; and by me this further
    charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it,
    neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for
    as I take it, it is almost day.
  PROVOST. I shall obey him.                      Exit MESSENGER
  DUKE. [Aside] This is his pardon, purchas'd by such sin
    For which the pardoner himself is in;
    Hence hath offence his quick celerity,
    When it is borne in high authority.
    When vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended
    That for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
    Now, sir, what news?
  PROVOST. I told you: Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine
    office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks
    strangely, for he hath not us'd it before.
  DUKE. Pray you, let's hear.
  PROVOST. [Reads] 'Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the afternoon,  
    Barnardine. For my better satisfaction, let me have Claudio's
    head sent me by five. Let this be duly performed, with a thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. Thus fail not
    to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.'
    What say you to this, sir?
  DUKE. What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in th'
    afternoon?
  PROVOST. A Bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.
    One that is a prisoner nine years old.
  DUKE. How came it that the absent Duke had not either deliver'd him
    to his liberty or executed him? I have heard it was ever his
    manner to do so.
  PROVOST. His friends still wrought reprieves for him; and, indeed,
    his fact, till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to
    an undoubted proof.
  DUKE. It is now apparent?
  PROVOST. Most manifest, and not denied by himself.
  DUKE. Hath he borne himself penitently in prison? How seems he to
    be touch'd?
  PROVOST. A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a  
    drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless, of what's past,
    present, or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately
    mortal.
  DUKE. He wants advice.
  PROVOST. He will hear none. He hath evermore had the liberty of the
    prison; give him leave to escape hence, he would not; drunk many
    times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. We have very oft
    awak'd him, as if to carry him to execution, and show'd him a
    seeming warrant for it; it hath not moved him at all.
  DUKE. More of him anon. There is written in your brow, Provost,
    honesty and constancy. If I read it not truly, my ancient skill
    beguiles me; but in the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself
    in hazard. Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no
    greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath sentenc'd him. To
    make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but four
    days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present and
    a dangerous courtesy.
  PROVOST. Pray, sir, in what?
  DUKE. In the delaying death.
  PROVOST. Alack! How may I do it, having the hour limited, and an  
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view
    of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the
    smallest.
  DUKE. By the vow of mine order, I warrant you, if my instructions
    may be your guide. Let this Barnardine be this morning executed,
    and his head borne to Angelo.
  PROVOST. Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
  DUKE. O, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it. Shave
    the head and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the
    penitent to be so bar'd before his death. You know the course is
    common. If anything fall to you upon this more than thanks and
    good fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead against
    it with my life.
  PROVOST. Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
  DUKE. Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the deputy?
  PROVOST. To him and to his substitutes.
  DUKE. You will think you have made no offence if the Duke avouch
    the justice of your dealing?
  PROVOST. But what likelihood is in that?
  DUKE. Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see you  
    fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can
    with ease attempt you, I will go further than I meant, to pluck
    all fears out of you. Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of
    the Duke. You know the character, I doubt not; and the signet is
    not strange to you.
  PROVOST. I know them both.
  DUKE. The contents of this is the return of the Duke; you shall
    anon over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find within
    these two days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows
    not; for he this very day receives letters of strange tenour,
    perchance of the Duke's death, perchance entering into some
    monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what is writ. Look, th'
    unfolding star calls up the shepherd. Put not yourself into
    amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are but
    easy when they are known. Call your executioner, and off with
    Barnardine's head. I will give him a present shrift, and advise
    him for a better place. Yet you are amaz'd, but this shall
    absolutely resolve you. Come away; it is almost clear dawn.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE III.
The prison

Enter POMPEY

  POMPEY. I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of
    profession; one would think it were Mistress Overdone's own
    house, for here be many of her old customers. First, here's young
    Master Rash; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old
    ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made five
    marks ready money. Marry, then ginger was not much in request,
    for the old women were all dead. Then is there here one Master
    Caper, at the suit of Master Threepile the mercer, for some four
    suits of peach-colour'd satin, which now peaches him a beggar.
    Then have we here young Dizy, and young Master Deepvow, and
    Master Copperspur, and Master Starvelackey, the rapier and dagger
    man, and young Dropheir that kill'd lusty Pudding, and Master
    Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shootie the great
    traveller, and wild Halfcan that stabb'd Pots, and, I think,
    forty more- all great doers in our trade, and are now 'for the
    Lord's sake.'
  
                            Enter ABHORSON

  ABHORSON. Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.
  POMPEY. Master Barnardine! You must rise and be hang'd, Master
    Barnardine!
  ABHORSON. What ho, Barnardine!
  BARNARDINE. [Within] A pox o' your throats! Who makes that noise
    there? What are you?
  POMPEY. Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir,
    to rise and be put to death.
  BARNARDINE. [ Within ] Away, you rogue, away; I am sleepy.
  ABHORSON. Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
  POMPEY. Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and
    sleep afterwards.
  ABHORSON. Go in to him, and fetch him out.
  POMPEY. He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.

                             Enter BARNARDINE

  ABHORSON. Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?  
  POMPEY. Very ready, sir.
  BARNARDINE. How now, Abhorson, what's the news with you?
  ABHORSON. Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers;
    for, look you, the warrant's come.
  BARNARDINE. You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not
    fitted for't.
  POMPEY. O, the better, sir! For he that drinks all night and is
    hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next
    day.

                  Enter DUKE, disguised as before

  ABHORSON. Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father.
    Do we jest now, think you?
  DUKE. Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are
    to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort you, and pray with
    you.
  BARNARDINE. Friar, not I; I have been drinking hard all night, and
    I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my
    brains with billets. I will not consent to die this day, that's  
    certain.
  DUKE. O, Sir, you must; and therefore I beseech you
    Look forward on the journey you shall go.
  BARNARDINE. I swear I will not die to-day for any man's persuasion.
  DUKE. But hear you-
  BARNARDINE. Not a word; if you have anything to say to me, come to
    my ward; for thence will not I to-day.                  Exit
  DUKE. Unfit to live or die. O gravel heart!
    After him, fellows; bring him to the block.
                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY

                            Enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  DUKE. A creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
    And to transport him in the mind he is
    Were damnable.
  PROVOST. Here in the prison, father,
    There died this morning of a cruel fever
    One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,  
    A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
    Just of his colour. What if we do omit
    This reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    And satisfy the deputy with the visage
    Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
  DUKE. O, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
    Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
    Prefix'd by Angelo. See this be done,
    And sent according to command; whiles I
    Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
  PROVOST. This shall be done, good father, presently.
    But Barnardine must die this afternoon;
    And how shall we continue Claudio,
    To save me from the danger that might come
    If he were known alive?
  DUKE. Let this be done:
    Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio.
    Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
    To the under generation, you shall find
    Your safety manifested.  
  PROVOST. I am your free dependant.
  DUKE. Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
                                                    Exit PROVOST
    Now will I write letters to Angelo-
    The Provost, he shall bear them- whose contents
    Shall witness to him I am near at home,
    And that, by great injunctions, I am bound
    To enter publicly. Him I'll desire
    To meet me at the consecrated fount,
    A league below the city; and from thence,
    By cold gradation and well-balanc'd form.
    We shall proceed with Angelo.

                         Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.
  DUKE. Convenient is it. Make a swift return;
    For I would commune with you of such things
    That want no ear but yours.
  PROVOST. I'll make all speed.                             Exit  
  ISABELLA. [ Within ] Peace, ho, be here!
  DUKE. The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know
    If yet her brother's pardon be come hither;
    But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
    To make her heavenly comforts of despair
    When it is least expected.

                           Enter ISABELLA

  ISABELLA. Ho, by your leave!
  DUKE. Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
  ISABELLA. The better, given me by so holy a man.
    Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
  DUKE. He hath releas'd him, Isabel, from the world.
    His head is off and sent to Angelo.
  ISABELLA. Nay, but it is not so.
  DUKE. It is no other.
    Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience,
  ISABELLA. O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!
  DUKE. You shall not be admitted to his sight.  
  ISABELLA. Unhappy Claudio! Wretched Isabel!
    Injurious world! Most damned Angelo!
  DUKE. This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
    Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
    Mark what I say, which you shall find
    By every syllable a faithful verity.
    The Duke comes home to-morrow. Nay, dry your eyes.
    One of our covent, and his confessor,
    Gives me this instance. Already he hath carried
    Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
    Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    There to give up their pow'r. If you can, pace your wisdom
    In that good path that I would wish it go,
    And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
    Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
    And general honour.
  ISABELLA. I am directed by you.
  DUKE. This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
    'Tis that he sent me of the Duke's return.
    Say, by this token, I desire his company  
    At Mariana's house to-night. Her cause and yours
    I'll perfect him withal; and he shall bring you
    Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
    Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
    I am combined by a sacred vow,
    And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter.
    Command these fretting waters from your eyes
    With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
    If I pervert your course. Who's here?

                           Enter LUCIO

  LUCIO. Good even. Friar, where's the Provost?
  DUKE. Not within, sir.
  LUCIO. O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes
    so red. Thou must be patient. I am fain to dine and sup with
    water and bran; I dare not for my head fill my belly; one
    fruitful meal would set me to't. But they say the Duke will be
    here to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I lov'd thy brother. If the
    old fantastical Duke of dark corners had been at home, he had  
    lived.                                         Exit ISABELLA
  DUKE. Sir, the Duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports;
    but the best is, he lives not in them.
  LUCIO. Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do; he's a
    better woodman than thou tak'st him for.
  DUKE. Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.
  LUCIO. Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee; I can tell thee pretty
    tales of the Duke.
  DUKE. You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be
    true; if not true, none were enough.
  LUCIO. I was once before him for getting a wench with child.
  DUKE. Did you such a thing?
  LUCIO. Yes, marry, did I; but I was fain to forswear it: they would
    else have married me to the rotten medlar.
  DUKE. Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.
  LUCIO. By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end. If bawdy
    talk offend you, we'll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a
    kind of burr; I shall stick.                          Exeunt




SCENE IV.
ANGELO'S house

Enter ANGELO and ESCALUS

  ESCALUS. Every letter he hath writ hath disvouch'd other.
  ANGELO. In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions show much
    like to madness; pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! And why
    meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there?
  ESCALUS. I guess not.
  ANGELO. And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his
    ent'ring that, if any crave redress of injustice, they should
    exhibit their petitions in the street?
  ESCALUS. He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
     complaints; and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which
    shall then have no power to stand against us.
  ANGELO. Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaim'd;
    Betimes i' th' morn I'll call you at your house;
    Give notice to such men of sort and suit
    As are to meet him.
  ESCALUS. I shall, sir; fare you well.
  ANGELO. Good night.                               Exit ESCALUS  
    This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
    And dull to all proceedings. A deflow'red maid!
    And by an eminent body that enforc'd
    The law against it! But that her tender shame
    Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
    How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no;
    For my authority bears a so credent bulk
    That no particular scandal once can touch
    But it confounds the breather. He should have liv'd,
    Save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
    Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
    By so receiving a dishonour'd life
    With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had liv'd!
    Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
    Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.         Exit




SCENE V.
Fields without the town

Enter DUKE in his own habit, and Friar PETER

  DUKE. These letters at fit time deliver me.   [Giving letters]
    The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.
    The matter being afoot, keep your instruction
    And hold you ever to our special drift;
    Though sometimes you do blench from this to that
    As cause doth minister. Go, call at Flavius' house,
    And tell him where I stay; give the like notice
    To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus,
    And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
    But send me Flavius first.
    PETER. It shall be speeded well.                  Exit FRIAR

                             Enter VARRIUS

  DUKE. I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste.
    Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
    Will greet us here anon. My gentle Varrius!           Exeunt




SCENE VI.
A street near the city gate

Enter ISABELLA and MARIANA

  ISABELLA. To speak so indirectly I am loath;
    I would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
    That is your part. Yet I am advis'd to do it;
    He says, to veil full purpose.
  MARIANA. Be rul'd by him.
  ISABELLA. Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
    He speak against me on the adverse side,
    I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
    That's bitter to sweet end.
  MARIANA. I would Friar Peter-

                         Enter FRIAR PETER

  ISABELLA. O, peace! the friar is come.
  PETER. Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
    Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
    He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded;  
    The generous and gravest citizens
    Have hent the gates, and very near upon
    The Duke is ent'ring; therefore, hence, away.         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
The city gate

Enter at several doors DUKE, VARRIUS, LORDS; ANGELO, ESCALUS, Lucio,
PROVOST, OFFICERS, and CITIZENS

  DUKE. My very worthy cousin, fairly met!
    Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
  ANGELO, ESCALUS. Happy return be to your royal Grace!
  DUKE. Many and hearty thankings to you both.
    We have made inquiry of you, and we hear
    Such goodness of your justice that our soul
    Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
    Forerunning more requital.
  ANGELO. You make my bonds still greater.
  DUKE. O, your desert speaks loud; and I should wrong it
    To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
    When it deserves, with characters of brass,
    A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
    And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand.
    And let the subject see, to make them know
    That outward courtesies would fain proclaim  
    Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus,
    You must walk by us on our other hand,
    And good supporters are you.

                 Enter FRIAR PETER and ISABELLA

  PETER. Now is your time; speak loud, and kneel before him.
  ISABELLA. Justice, O royal Duke! Vail your regard
    Upon a wrong'd- I would fain have said a maid!
    O worthy Prince, dishonour not your eye
    By throwing it on any other object
    Till you have heard me in my true complaint,
    And given me justice, justice, justice, justice.
  DUKE. Relate your wrongs. In what? By whom? Be brief.
    Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice;
    Reveal yourself to him.
  ISABELLA. O worthy Duke,
    You bid me seek redemption of the devil!
    Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak
    Must either punish me, not being believ'd,  
    Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O, hear me, here!
  ANGELO. My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm;
    She hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
    Cut off by course of justice-
  ISABELLA. By course of justice!
  ANGELO. And she will speak most bitterly and strange.
  ISABELLA. Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak.
    That Angelo's forsworn, is it not strange?
    That Angelo's a murderer, is't not strange?
    That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
    An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,
    Is it not strange and strange?
  DUKE. Nay, it is ten times strange.
  ISABELLA. It is not truer he is Angelo
    Than this is all as true as it is strange;
    Nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth
    To th' end of reck'ning.
  DUKE. Away with her. Poor soul,
    She speaks this in th' infirmity of sense.
  ISABELLA. O Prince! I conjure thee, as thou believ'st  
    There is another comfort than this world,
    That thou neglect me not with that opinion
    That I am touch'd with madness. Make not impossible
    That which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible
    But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
    May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute,
    As Angelo; even so may Angelo,
    In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
    Be an arch-villain. Believe it, royal Prince,
    If he be less, he's nothing; but he's more,
    Had I more name for badness.
  DUKE. By mine honesty,
    If she be mad, as I believe no other,
    Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
    Such a dependency of thing on thing,
    As e'er I heard in madness.
  ISABELLA. O gracious Duke,
    Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
    For inequality; but let your reason serve
    To make the truth appear where it seems hid,  
    And hide the false seems true.
  DUKE. Many that are not mad
    Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?
  ISABELLA. I am the sister of one Claudio,
    Condemn'd upon the act of fornication
    To lose his head; condemn'd by Angelo.
    I, in probation of a sisterhood,
    Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
    As then the messenger-
  LUCIO. That's I, an't like your Grace.
    I came to her from Claudio, and desir'd her
    To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
    For her poor brother's pardon.
  ISABELLA. That's he, indeed.
  DUKE. You were not bid to speak.
  LUCIO. No, my good lord;
    Nor wish'd to hold my peace.
  DUKE. I wish you now, then;
    Pray you take note of it; and when you have
    A business for yourself, pray heaven you then  
    Be perfect.
  LUCIO. I warrant your honour.
  DUKE. The warrant's for yourself; take heed to't.
  ISABELLA. This gentleman told somewhat of my tale.
  LUCIO. Right.
  DUKE. It may be right; but you are i' the wrong
    To speak before your time. Proceed.
  ISABELLA. I went
    To this pernicious caitiff deputy.
  DUKE. That's somewhat madly spoken.
  ISABELLA. Pardon it;
    The phrase is to the matter.
  DUKE. Mended again. The matter- proceed.
  ISABELLA. In brief- to set the needless process by,
    How I persuaded, how I pray'd, and kneel'd,
    How he refell'd me, and how I replied,
    For this was of much length- the vile conclusion
    I now begin with grief and shame to utter:
    He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
    To his concupiscible intemperate lust,  
    Release my brother; and, after much debatement,
    My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
    And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes,
    His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
    For my poor brother's head.
  DUKE. This is most likely!
  ISABELLA. O that it were as like as it is true!
  DUKE. By heaven, fond wretch, thou know'st not what thou speak'st,
    Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour
    In hateful practice. First, his integrity
    Stands without blemish; next, it imports no reason
    That with such vehemency he should pursue
    Faults proper to himself. If he had so offended,
    He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself,
    And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on;
    Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
    Thou cam'st here to complain.
  ISABELLA. And is this all?
    Then, O you blessed ministers above,
    Keep me in patience; and, with ripened time,  
    Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
    In countenance! Heaven shield your Grace from woe,
    As I, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!
  DUKE. I know you'd fain be gone. An officer!
    To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
    A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
    On him so near us? This needs must be a practice.
    Who knew of your intent and coming hither?
  ISABELLA. One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.
  DUKE. A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?
  LUCIO. My lord, I know him; 'tis a meddling friar.
    I do not like the man; had he been lay, my lord,
    For certain words he spake against your Grace
    In your retirement, I had swing'd him soundly.
  DUKE. Words against me? This's a good friar, belike!
    And to set on this wretched woman here
    Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.
  LUCIO. But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
    I saw them at the prison; a saucy friar,
    A very scurvy fellow.  
  PETER. Blessed be your royal Grace!
    I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
    Your royal ear abus'd. First, hath this woman
    Most wrongfully accus'd your substitute;
    Who is as free from touch or soil with her
    As she from one ungot.
  DUKE. We did believe no less.
    Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?
  PETER. I know him for a man divine and holy;
    Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
    As he's reported by this gentleman;
    And, on my trust, a man that never yet
    Did, as he vouches, misreport your Grace.
  LUCIO. My lord, most villainously; believe it.
  PETER. Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
    But at this instant he is sick, my lord,
    Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request-
    Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
    Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo- came I hither
    To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know  
    Is true and false; and what he, with his oath
    And all probation, will make up full clear,
    Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman-
    To justify this worthy nobleman,
    So vulgarly and personally accus'd-
    Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
    Till she herself confess it.
  DUKE. Good friar, let's hear it.         Exit ISABELLA guarded
    Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
    O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
    Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo;
    In this I'll be impartial; be you judge
    Of your own cause.

                     Enter MARIANA veiled

    Is this the witness, friar?
  FIRST let her show her face, and after speak.
  MARIANA. Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face
    Until my husband bid me.  
  DUKE. What, are you married?
  MARIANA. No, my lord.
  DUKE. Are you a maid?
  MARIANA. No, my lord.
  DUKE. A widow, then?
  MARIANA. Neither, my lord.
  DUKE. Why, you are nothing then; neither maid, widow, nor wife.
  LUCIO. My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither
    maid, widow, nor wife.
  DUKE. Silence that fellow. I would he had some cause
    To prattle for himself.
  LUCIO. Well, my lord.
  MARIANA. My lord, I do confess I ne'er was married,
    And I confess, besides, I am no maid.
    I have known my husband; yet my husband
    Knows not that ever he knew me.
  LUCIO. He was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.
  DUKE. For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
  LUCIO. Well, my lord.
  DUKE. This is no witness for Lord Angelo.  
  MARIANA. Now I come to't, my lord:
    She that accuses him of fornication,
    In self-same manner doth accuse my husband;
    And charges him, my lord, with such a time
    When I'll depose I had him in mine arms,
    With all th' effect of love.
  ANGELO. Charges she moe than me?
  MARIANA. Not that I know.
  DUKE. No? You say your husband.
  MARIANA. Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
    Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
    But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.
  ANGELO. This is a strange abuse. Let's see thy face.
  MARIANA. My husband bids me; now I will unmask.
                                                     [Unveiling]
    This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
    Which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on;
    This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
    Was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
    That took away the match from Isabel,  
    And did supply thee at thy garden-house
    In her imagin'd person.
  DUKE. Know you this woman?
  LUCIO. Carnally, she says.
  DUKE. Sirrah, no more.
  LUCIO. Enough, my lord.
  ANGELO. My lord, I must confess I know this woman;
    And five years since there was some speech of marriage
    Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
    Partly for that her promised proportions
    Came short of composition; but in chief
    For that her reputation was disvalued
    In levity. Since which time of five years
    I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
    Upon my faith and honour.
  MARIANA. Noble Prince,
    As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
    As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
    I am affianc'd this man's wife as strongly
    As words could make up vows. And, my good lord,  
    But Tuesday night last gone, in's garden-house,
    He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
    Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
    Or else for ever be confixed here,
    A marble monument!
  ANGELO. I did but smile till now.
    Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice;
    My patience here is touch'd. I do perceive
    These poor informal women are no more
    But instruments of some more mightier member
    That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord,
    To find this practice out.
  DUKE. Ay, with my heart;
    And punish them to your height of pleasure.
    Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
    Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
    Though they would swear down each particular saint,
    Were testimonies against his worth and credit,
    That's seal'd in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
    Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains  
    To find out this abuse, whence 'tis deriv'd.
    There is another friar that set them on;
    Let him be sent for.
  PETER. Would lie were here, my lord! For he indeed
    Hath set the women on to this complaint.
    Your provost knows the place where he abides,
    And he may fetch him.
  DUKE. Go, do it instantly.                        Exit PROVOST
    And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
    Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
    Do with your injuries as seems you best
    In any chastisement. I for a while will leave you;
    But stir not you till you have well determin'd
    Upon these slanderers.
  ESCALUS. My lord, we'll do it throughly.             Exit DUKE
    Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar Lodowick to be
    a dishonest person?
  LUCIO. 'Cucullus non facit monachum': honest in nothing but in his
    clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the
    Duke.  
  ESCALUS. We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
    enforce them against him. We shall find this friar a notable
    fellow.
  LUCIO. As any in Vienna, on my word.
  ESCALUS. Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with
    her. [Exit an ATTENDANT] Pray you, my lord, give me leave to
    question; you shall see how I'll handle her.
  LUCIO. Not better than he, by her own report.
  ESCALUS. Say you?
  LUCIO. Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, she would
    sooner confess; perchance, publicly, she'll be asham'd.

       Re-enter OFFICERS with ISABELLA; and PROVOST with the
                    DUKE in his friar's habit

  ESCALUS. I will go darkly to work with her.
  LUCIO. That's the way; for women are light at midnight.
  ESCALUS. Come on, mistress; here's a gentlewoman denies all that
    you have said.
  LUCIO. My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the  
    Provost.
  ESCALUS. In very good time. Speak not you to him till we call upon
    you.
  LUCIO. Mum.
  ESCALUS. Come, sir; did you set these women on to slander Lord
    Angelo? They have confess'd you did.
  DUKE. 'Tis false.
  ESCALUS. How! Know you where you are?
  DUKE. Respect to your great place! and let the devil
    Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
    Where is the Duke? 'Tis he should hear me speak.
  ESCALUS. The Duke's in us; and we will hear you speak;
    Look you speak justly.
  DUKE. Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls,
    Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
    Good night to your redress! Is the Duke gone?
    Then is your cause gone too. The Duke's unjust
    Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
    And put your trial in the villain's mouth
    Which here you come to accuse.  
  LUCIO. This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.
  ESCALUS. Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
    Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
    To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth,
    And in the witness of his proper ear,
    To call him villain; and then to glance from him
    To th' Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
    Take him hence; to th' rack with him! We'll touze you
    Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
    What, 'unjust'!
  DUKE. Be not so hot; the Duke
    Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
    Dare rack his own; his subject am I not,
    Nor here provincial. My business in this state
    Made me a looker-on here in Vienna,
    Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
    Till it o'errun the stew: laws for all faults,
    But faults so countenanc'd that the strong statutes
    Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
    As much in mock as mark.  
  ESCALUS. Slander to th' state! Away with him to prison!
  ANGELO. What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
    Is this the man that you did tell us of?
  LUCIO. 'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, good-man bald-pate.
    Do you know me?
  DUKE. I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. I met you at
    the prison, in the absence of the Duke.
  LUCIO. O did you so? And do you remember what you said of the Duke?
  DUKE. Most notedly, sir.
  LUCIO. Do you so, sir? And was the Duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and
    a coward, as you then reported him to be?
  DUKE. You must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that my
    report; you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much worse.
  LUCIO. O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for
    thy speeches?
  DUKE. I protest I love the Duke as I love myself.
  ANGELO. Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable
    abuses!
  ESCALUS. Such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal. Away with him to
    prison! Where is the Provost? Away with him to prison! Lay bolts  
    enough upon him; let him speak no more. Away with those giglets
    too, and with the other confederate companion!
                            [The PROVOST lays bands on the DUKE]
  DUKE. Stay, sir; stay awhile.
  ANGELO. What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.
  LUCIO. Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! Why, you
    bald-pated lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? Show your
    knave's visage, with a pox to you! Show your sheep-biting face,
    and be hang'd an hour! Will't not off?
             [Pulls off the FRIAR'S bood and discovers the DUKE]
  DUKE. Thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.
    First, Provost, let me bail these gentle three.
    [To Lucio] Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
    Must have a word anon. Lay hold on him.
  LUCIO. This may prove worse than hanging.
  DUKE. [To ESCALUS] What you have spoke I pardon; sit you down.
    We'll borrow place of him. [To ANGELO] Sir, by your leave.
    Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
    That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,
    Rely upon it till my tale be heard,  
    And hold no longer out.
  ANGELO. O my dread lord,
    I should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
    To think I can be undiscernible,
    When I perceive your Grace, like pow'r divine,
    Hath look'd upon my passes. Then, good Prince,
    No longer session hold upon my shame,
    But let my trial be mine own confession;
    Immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
    Is all the grace I beg.
  DUKE. Come hither, Mariana.
    Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
  ANGELO. I was, my lord.
  DUKE. Go, take her hence and marry her instantly.
    Do you the office, friar; which consummate,
    Return him here again. Go with him, Provost.
                Exeunt ANGELO, MARIANA, FRIAR PETER, and PROVOST
  ESCALUS. My lord, I am more amaz'd at his dishonour
    Than at the strangeness of it.
  DUKE. Come hither, Isabel.  
    Your friar is now your prince. As I was then
    Advertising and holy to your business,
    Not changing heart with habit, I am still
    Attorney'd at your service.
  ISABELLA. O, give me pardon,
    That I, your vassal have employ'd and pain'd
    Your unknown sovereignty.
  DUKE. You are pardon'd, Isabel.
    And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
    Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart;
    And you may marvel why I obscur'd myself,
    Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
    Make rash remonstrance of my hidden pow'r
    Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
    It was the swift celerity of his death,
    Which I did think with slower foot came on,
    That brain'd my purpose. But peace be with him!
    That life is better life, past fearing death,
    Than that which lives to fear. Make it your comfort,
    So happy is your brother.  
  ISABELLA. I do, my lord.

       Re-enter ANGELO, MARIANA, FRIAR PETER, and PROVOST

  DUKE. For this new-married man approaching here,
    Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
    Your well-defended honour, you must pardon
    For Mariana's sake; but as he adjudg'd your brother-
    Being criminal in double violation
    Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,
    Thereon dependent, for your brother's life-
    The very mercy of the law cries out
    Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
    'An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!'
    Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
    Like doth quit like, and Measure still for Measure.
    Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested,
    Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
    We do condemn thee to the very block
    Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.  
    Away with him!
  MARIANA. O my most gracious lord,
    I hope you will not mock me with a husband.
  DUKE. It is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
    Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
    I thought your marriage fit; else imputation,
    For that he knew you, might reproach your life,
    And choke your good to come. For his possessions,
    Although by confiscation they are ours,
    We do instate and widow you withal
    To buy you a better husband.
  MARIANA. O my dear lord,
    I crave no other, nor no better man.
  DUKE. Never crave him; we are definitive.
  MARIANA. Gentle my liege-                           [Kneeling]
  DUKE. You do but lose your labour.
    Away with him to death! [To LUCIO] Now, sir, to you.
  MARIANA. O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part;
    Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
    I'll lend you all my life to do you service.  
  DUKE. Against all sense you do importune her.
    Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
    Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
    And take her hence in horror.
  MARIANA. Isabel,
    Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
    Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all.
    They say best men moulded out of faults;
    And, for the most, become much more the better
    For being a little bad; so may my husband.
    O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?
  DUKE. He dies for Claudio's death.
  ISABELLA. [Kneeling] Most bounteous sir,
    Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
    As if my brother liv'd. I partly think
    A due sincerity govern'd his deeds
    Till he did look on me; since it is so,
    Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
    In that he did the thing for which he died;
    For Angelo,  
    His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
    And must be buried but as an intent
    That perish'd by the way. Thoughts are no subjects;
    Intents but merely thoughts.
  MARIANA. Merely, my lord.
  DUKE. Your suit's unprofitable; stand up, I say.
    I have bethought me of another fault.
    Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
    At an unusual hour?
  PROVOST. It was commanded so.
  DUKE. Had you a special warrant for the deed?
  PROVOST. No, my good lord; it was by private message.
  DUKE. For which I do discharge you of your office;
    Give up your keys.
  PROVOST. Pardon me, noble lord;
    I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    Yet did repent me, after more advice;
    For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    That should by private order else have died,
    I have reserv'd alive.  
  DUKE. What's he?
  PROVOST. His name is Barnardine.
  DUKE. I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
    Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.      Exit PROVOST
  ESCALUS. I am sorry one so learned and so wise
    As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,
    Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
  ANGELO. I am sorry that such sorrow I procure;
    And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
    That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
    'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

       Re-enter PROVOST, with BARNARDINE, CLAUDIO (muffled)
                            and JULIET

  DUKE. Which is that Barnardine?
  PROVOST. This, my lord.
  DUKE. There was a friar told me of this man.
    Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul,  
    That apprehends no further than this world,
    And squar'st thy life according. Thou'rt condemn'd;
    But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
    And pray thee take this mercy to provide
    For better times to come. Friar, advise him;
    I leave him to your hand. What muffl'd fellow's that?
  PROVOST. This is another prisoner that I sav'd,
    Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
    As like almost to Claudio as himself.    [Unmuffles CLAUDIO]
  DUKE. [To ISABELLA] If he be like your brother, for his sake
    Is he pardon'd; and for your lovely sake,
    Give me your hand and say you will be mine,
    He is my brother too. But fitter time for that.
    By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe;
    Methinks I see a quick'ning in his eye.
    Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well.
    Look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours.
    I find an apt remission in myself;
    And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon.
    To Lucio] You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,  
    One all of luxury, an ass, a madman!
    Wherein have I so deserv'd of you
    That you extol me thus?
  LUCIO. Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the trick.
    If you will hang me for it, you may; but I had rather it would
    please you I might be whipt.
  DUKE. Whipt first, sir, and hang'd after.
    Proclaim it, Provost, round about the city,
    If any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow-
    As I have heard him swear himself there's one
    Whom he begot with child, let her appear,
    And he shall marry her. The nuptial finish'd,
    Let him be whipt and hang'd.
  LUCIO. I beseech your Highness, do not marry me to a whore. Your
    Highness said even now I made you a duke; good my lord, do not
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.
  DUKE. Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
    Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal
    Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison;
    And see our pleasure herein executed.  
  LUCIO. Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping,
    and hanging.
  DUKE. Slandering a prince deserves it.
                                      Exeunt OFFICERS with LUCIO
    She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
    Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo;
    I have confess'd her, and I know her virtue.
    Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness;
    There's more behind that is more gratulate.
    Thanks, Provost, for thy care and secrecy;
    We shall employ thee in a worthier place.
    Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
    The head of Ragozine for Claudio's:
    Th' offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
    I have a motion much imports your good;
    Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
    What's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
    So, bring us to our palace, where we'll show
    What's yet behind that's meet you all should know.
                                                          Exeunt  

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1597

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  THE DUKE OF VENICE
  THE PRINCE OF MOROCCO, suitor to Portia
  THE PRINCE OF ARRAGON,    "    "    "
  ANTONIO, a merchant of Venice
  BASSANIO, his friend, suitor to Portia
  SOLANIO,   friend to Antonio and Bassanio
  SALERIO,      "    "    "     "     "
  GRATIANO,     "    "    "     "     "
  LORENZO, in love with Jessica
  SHYLOCK, a rich Jew
  TUBAL, a Jew, his friend
  LAUNCELOT GOBBO, a clown, servant to Shylock
  OLD GOBBO, father to Launcelot
  LEONARDO, servant to Bassanio
  BALTHASAR, servant to Portia
  STEPHANO,     "     "    "

  PORTIA, a rich heiress
  NERISSA, her waiting-maid
  JESSICA, daughter to Shylock  

  Magnificoes of Venice, Officers of the Court of Justice,
    Gaoler, Servants, and other Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Venice, and PORTIA'S house at Belmont


ACT I. SCENE I.
Venice. A street

Enter ANTONIO, SALERIO, and SOLANIO

  ANTONIO. In sooth, I know not why I am so sad.
    It wearies me; you say it wearies you;
    But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
    What stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born,
    I am to learn;
    And such a want-wit sadness makes of me
    That I have much ado to know myself.
  SALERIO. Your mind is tossing on the ocean;
    There where your argosies, with portly sail-
    Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
    Or as it were the pageants of the sea-
    Do overpeer the petty traffickers,
    That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
    As they fly by them with their woven wings.
  SOLANIO. Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
    The better part of my affections would
    Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still  
    Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
    Peering in maps for ports, and piers, and roads;
    And every object that might make me fear
    Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt,
    Would make me sad.
  SALERIO. My wind, cooling my broth,
    Would blow me to an ague when I thought
    What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
    I should not see the sandy hour-glass run
    But I should think of shallows and of flats,
    And see my wealthy Andrew dock'd in sand,
    Vailing her high top lower than her ribs
    To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
    And see the holy edifice of stone,
    And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
    Which, touching but my gentle vessel's side,
    Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
    Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
    And, in a word, but even now worth this,
    And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought  
    To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
    That such a thing bechanc'd would make me sad?
    But tell not me; I know Antonio
    Is sad to think upon his merchandise.
  ANTONIO. Believe me, no; I thank my fortune for it,
    My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
    Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
    Upon the fortune of this present year;
    Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.
  SOLANIO. Why then you are in love.
  ANTONIO. Fie, fie!
  SOLANIO. Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
    Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy
    For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry,
    Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed Janus,
    Nature hath fram'd strange fellows in her time:
    Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
    And laugh like parrots at a bag-piper;
    And other of such vinegar aspect
    That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile  
    Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.

               Enter BASSANIO, LORENZO, and GRATIANO

    Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
    Gratiano and Lorenzo. Fare ye well;
    We leave you now with better company.
  SALERIO. I would have stay'd till I had made you merry,
    If worthier friends had not prevented me.
  ANTONIO. Your worth is very dear in my regard.
    I take it your own business calls on you,
    And you embrace th' occasion to depart.
  SALERIO. Good morrow, my good lords.
  BASSANIO. Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? Say when.
    You grow exceeding strange; must it be so?
  SALERIO. We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
                                      Exeunt SALERIO and SOLANIO
  LORENZO. My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
    We two will leave you; but at dinner-time,
    I pray you, have in mind where we must meet.  
  BASSANIO. I will not fail you.
  GRATIANO. You look not well, Signior Antonio;
    You have too much respect upon the world;
    They lose it that do buy it with much care.
    Believe me, you are marvellously chang'd.
  ANTONIO. I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano-
    A stage, where every man must play a part,
    And mine a sad one.
  GRATIANO. Let me play the fool.
    With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come;
    And let my liver rather heat with wine
    Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
    Why should a man whose blood is warm within
    Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster,
    Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice
    By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio-
    I love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks-
    There are a sort of men whose visages
    Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
    And do a wilful stillness entertain,  
    With purpose to be dress'd in an opinion
    Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit;
    As who should say 'I am Sir Oracle,
    And when I ope my lips let no dog bark.'
    O my Antonio, I do know of these
    That therefore only are reputed wise
    For saying nothing; when, I am very sure,
    If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
    Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools.
    I'll tell thee more of this another time.
    But fish not with this melancholy bait
    For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.
    Come, good Lorenzo. Fare ye well awhile;
    I'll end my exhortation after dinner.
  LORENZO. Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time.
    I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
    For Gratiano never lets me speak.
  GRATIANO. Well, keep me company but two years moe,
    Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.
  ANTONIO. Fare you well; I'll grow a talker for this gear.  
  GRATIANO. Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable
    In a neat's tongue dried, and a maid not vendible.
                                     Exeunt GRATIANO and LORENZO
  ANTONIO. Is that anything now?
  BASSANIO. Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than
    any man in all Venice. His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid
    in, two bushels of chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find
    them, and when you have them they are not worth the search.
  ANTONIO. Well; tell me now what lady is the same
    To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
    That you to-day promis'd to tell me of?
  BASSANIO. 'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
    How much I have disabled mine estate
    By something showing a more swelling port
    Than my faint means would grant continuance;
    Nor do I now make moan to be abridg'd
    From such a noble rate; but my chief care
    Is to come fairly off from the great debts
    Wherein my time, something too prodigal,
    Hath left me gag'd. To you, Antonio,  
    I owe the most, in money and in love;
    And from your love I have a warranty
    To unburden all my plots and purposes
    How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
  ANTONIO. I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it;
    And if it stand, as you yourself still do,
    Within the eye of honour, be assur'd
    My purse, my person, my extremest means,
    Lie all unlock'd to your occasions.
  BASSANIO. In my school-days, when I had lost one shaft,
    I shot his fellow of the self-same flight
    The self-same way, with more advised watch,
    To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
    I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof,
    Because what follows is pure innocence.
    I owe you much; and, like a wilful youth,
    That which I owe is lost; but if you please
    To shoot another arrow that self way
    Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
    As I will watch the aim, or to find both,  
    Or bring your latter hazard back again
    And thankfully rest debtor for the first.
  ANTONIO. You know me well, and herein spend but time
    To wind about my love with circumstance;
    And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
    In making question of my uttermost
    Than if you had made waste of all I have.
    Then do but say to me what I should do
    That in your knowledge may by me be done,
    And I am prest unto it; therefore, speak.
  BASSANIO. In Belmont is a lady richly left,
    And she is fair and, fairer than that word,
    Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
    I did receive fair speechless messages.
    Her name is Portia- nothing undervalu'd
    To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia.
    Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth;
    For the four winds blow in from every coast
    Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
    Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,  
    Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond,
    And many Jasons come in quest of her.
    O my Antonio, had I but the means
    To hold a rival place with one of them,
    I have a mind presages me such thrift
    That I should questionless be fortunate.
  ANTONIO. Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea;
    Neither have I money nor commodity
    To raise a present sum; therefore go forth,
    Try what my credit can in Venice do;
    That shall be rack'd, even to the uttermost,
    To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
    Go presently inquire, and so will I,
    Where money is; and I no question make
    To have it of my trust or for my sake.                Exeunt





SCENE II.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Enter PORTIA with her waiting-woman, NERISSA

  PORTIA. By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this
    great world.
  NERISSA. You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the
    same abundance as your good fortunes are; and yet, for aught I
    see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that
    starve with nothing. It is no mean happiness, therefore, to be
    seated in the mean: superfluity come sooner by white hairs, but
    competency lives longer.
  PORTIA. Good sentences, and well pronounc'd.
  NERISSA. They would be better, if well followed.
  PORTIA. If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do,
    chapels had been churches, and poor men's cottages princes'
    palaces. It is a good divine that follows his own instructions; I
    can easier teach twenty what were good to be done than to be one
    of the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain may devise
    laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree;
    such a hare is madness the youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good  
    counsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to
    choose me a husband. O me, the word 'choose'! I may neither
    choose who I would nor refuse who I dislike; so is the will of a
    living daughter curb'd by the will of a dead father. Is it not
    hard, Nerissa, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?
  NERISSA. Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death
    have good inspirations; therefore the lott'ry that he hath
    devised in these three chests, of gold, silver, and lead- whereof
    who chooses his meaning chooses you- will no doubt never be
    chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly love. But
    what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these
    princely suitors that are already come?
  PORTIA. I pray thee over-name them; and as thou namest them, I will
    describe them; and according to my description, level at my
    affection.
  NERISSA. First, there is the Neapolitan prince.
  PORTIA. Ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of
    his horse; and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good
    parts that he can shoe him himself; I am much afear'd my lady his
    mother play'd false with a smith.  
  NERISSA. Then is there the County Palatine.
  PORTIA. He doth nothing but frown, as who should say 'An you will
    not have me, choose.' He hears merry tales and smiles not. I fear
    he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so
    full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had rather be married
    to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of
    these. God defend me from these two!
  NERISSA. How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon?
  PORTIA. God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man. In
    truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker, but he- why, he hath a
    horse better than the Neapolitan's, a better bad habit of
    frowning than the Count Palatine; he is every man in no man. If a
    throstle sing he falls straight a-cap'ring; he will fence with
    his own shadow; if I should marry him, I should marry twenty
    husbands. If he would despise me, I would forgive him; for if he
    love me to madness, I shall never requite him.
  NERISSA. What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron of
    England?
  PORTIA. You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me,
    nor I him: he hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you  
    will come into the court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth
    in the English. He is a proper man's picture; but alas, who can
    converse with a dumb-show? How oddly he is suited! I think he
    bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet
    in Germany, and his behaviour everywhere.
  NERISSA. What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour?
  PORTIA. That he hath a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed
    a box of the ear of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him
    again when he was able; I think the Frenchman became his surety,
    and seal'd under for another.
  NERISSA. How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony's
    nephew?
  PORTIA. Very vilely in the morning when he is sober; and most
    vilely in the afternoon when he is drunk. When he is best, he is
    a little worse than a man, and when he is worst, he is little
    better than a beast. An the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I
    shall make shift to go without him.
  NERISSA. If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket,
    you should refuse to perform your father's will, if you should
    refuse to accept him.  
  PORTIA. Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep
    glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary casket; for if the devil be
    within and that temptation without, I know he will choose it. I
    will do anything, Nerissa, ere I will be married to a sponge.
  NERISSA. You need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords;
    they have acquainted me with their determinations, which is
    indeed to return to their home, and to trouble you with no more
    suit, unless you may be won by some other sort than your father's
    imposition, depending on the caskets.
  PORTIA. If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as chaste as
    Diana, unless I be obtained by the manner of my father's will. I
    am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable; for there is not
    one among them but I dote on his very absence, and I pray God
    grant them a fair departure.
  NERISSA. Do you not remember, lady, in your father's time, a
    Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of
    the Marquis of Montferrat?
  PORTIA. Yes, yes, it was Bassanio; as I think, so was he call'd.
  NERISSA. True, madam; he, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes
    look'd upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.  
  PORTIA. I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy
    praise.

                         Enter a SERVINGMAN

    How now! what news?
  SERVINGMAN. The four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their
    leave; and there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of
    Morocco, who brings word the Prince his master will be here
    to-night.
  PORTIA. If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I
    can bid the other four farewell, I should be glad of his
    approach; if he have the condition of a saint and the complexion
    of a devil, I had rather he should shrive me than wive me.
    Come, Nerissa. Sirrah, go before.
    Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another knocks at the
      door.                                               Exeunt




SCENE III.
Venice. A public place

Enter BASSANIO With SHYLOCK the Jew

  SHYLOCK. Three thousand ducats- well.
  BASSANIO. Ay, sir, for three months.
  SHYLOCK. For three months- well.
  BASSANIO. For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.
  SHYLOCK. Antonio shall become bound- well.
  BASSANIO. May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your
    answer?
  SHYLOCK. Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio bound.
  BASSANIO. Your answer to that.
  SHYLOCK. Antonio is a good man.
  BASSANIO. Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
  SHYLOCK. Ho, no, no, no, no; my meaning in saying he is a good man
    is to have you understand me that he is sufficient; yet his means
    are in supposition: he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another
    to the Indies; I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a
    third at Mexico, a fourth for England- and other ventures he
    hath, squand'red abroad. But ships are but boards, sailors but  
    men; there be land-rats and water-rats, water-thieves and
    land-thieves- I mean pirates; and then there is the peril of
    waters, winds, and rocks. The man is, notwithstanding,
    sufficient. Three thousand ducats- I think I may take his bond.
  BASSANIO. Be assur'd you may.
  SHYLOCK. I will be assur'd I may; and, that I may be assured, I
    will bethink me. May I speak with Antonio?
  BASSANIO. If it please you to dine with us.
  SHYLOCK. Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your
    prophet, the Nazarite, conjured the devil into! I will buy with
    you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so
    following; but I will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray
    with you. What news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here?

                            Enter ANTONIO

  BASSANIO. This is Signior Antonio.
  SHYLOCK.  [Aside]  How like a fawning publican he looks!
    I hate him for he is a Christian;
    But more for that in low simplicity  
    He lends out money gratis, and brings down
    The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
    If I can catch him once upon the hip,
    I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
    He hates our sacred nation; and he rails,
    Even there where merchants most do congregate,
    On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
    Which he calls interest. Cursed be my tribe
    If I forgive him!
  BASSANIO. Shylock, do you hear?
  SHYLOCK. I am debating of my present store,
    And, by the near guess of my memory,
    I cannot instantly raise up the gross
    Of full three thousand ducats. What of that?
    Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
    Will furnish me. But soft! how many months
    Do you desire?  [To ANTONIO]  Rest you fair, good signior;
    Your worship was the last man in our mouths.
  ANTONIO. Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
    By taking nor by giving of excess,  
    Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
    I'll break a custom.  [To BASSANIO]  Is he yet possess'd
    How much ye would?
  SHYLOCK. Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.
  ANTONIO. And for three months.
  SHYLOCK. I had forgot- three months; you told me so.
    Well then, your bond; and, let me see- but hear you,
    Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow
    Upon advantage.
  ANTONIO. I do never use it.
  SHYLOCK. When Jacob graz'd his uncle Laban's sheep-
    This Jacob from our holy Abram was,
    As his wise mother wrought in his behalf,
    The third possessor; ay, he was the third-
  ANTONIO. And what of him? Did he take interest?
  SHYLOCK. No, not take interest; not, as you would say,
    Directly int'rest; mark what Jacob did:
    When Laban and himself were compromis'd
    That all the eanlings which were streak'd and pied
    Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank,  
    In end of autumn turned to the rams;
    And when the work of generation was
    Between these woolly breeders in the act,
    The skilful shepherd pill'd me certain wands,
    And, in the doing of the deed of kind,
    He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
    Who, then conceiving, did in eaning time
    Fall parti-colour'd lambs, and those were Jacob's.
    This was a way to thrive, and he was blest;
    And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.
  ANTONIO. This was a venture, sir, that Jacob serv'd for;
    A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
    But sway'd and fashion'd by the hand of heaven.
    Was this inserted to make interest good?
    Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?
  SHYLOCK. I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast.
    But note me, signior.
  ANTONIO.  [Aside]  Mark you this, Bassanio,
    The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.
    An evil soul producing holy witness  
    Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
    A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
    O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!
  SHYLOCK. Three thousand ducats- 'tis a good round sum.
    Three months from twelve; then let me see, the rate-
  ANTONIO. Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?
  SHYLOCK. Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
    In the Rialto you have rated me
    About my moneys and my usances;
    Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
    For suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe;
    You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog,
    And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine,
    And all for use of that which is mine own.
    Well then, it now appears you need my help;
    Go to, then; you come to me, and you say
    'Shylock, we would have moneys.' You say so-
    You that did void your rheum upon my beard
    And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
    Over your threshold; moneys is your suit.  
    What should I say to you? Should I not say
    'Hath a dog money? Is it possible
    A cur can lend three thousand ducats?' Or
    Shall I bend low and, in a bondman's key,
    With bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness,
    Say this:
    'Fair sir, you spit on me on Wednesday last,
    You spurn'd me such a day; another time
    You call'd me dog; and for these courtesies
    I'll lend you thus much moneys'?
  ANTONIO. I am as like to call thee so again,
    To spit on thee again, to spurn thee too.
    If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
    As to thy friends- for when did friendship take
    A breed for barren metal of his friend?-
    But lend it rather to thine enemy,
    Who if he break thou mayst with better face
    Exact the penalty.
  SHYLOCK. Why, look you, how you storm!
    I would be friends with you, and have your love,  
    Forget the shames that you have stain'd me with,
    Supply your present wants, and take no doit
    Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me.
    This is kind I offer.
  BASSANIO. This were kindness.
  SHYLOCK. This kindness will I show.
    Go with me to a notary, seal me there
    Your single bond, and, in a merry sport,
    If you repay me not on such a day,
    In such a place, such sum or sums as are
    Express'd in the condition, let the forfeit
    Be nominated for an equal pound
    Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
    In what part of your body pleaseth me.
  ANTONIO. Content, in faith; I'll seal to such a bond,
    And say there is much kindness in the Jew.
  BASSANIO. You shall not seal to such a bond for me;
    I'll rather dwell in my necessity.
  ANTONIO. Why, fear not, man; I will not forfeit it;
    Within these two months- that's a month before  
    This bond expires- I do expect return
    Of thrice three times the value of this bond.
  SHYLOCK. O father Abram, what these Christians are,
    Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
    The thoughts of others! Pray you, tell me this:
    If he should break his day, what should I gain
    By the exaction of the forfeiture?
    A pound of man's flesh taken from a man
    Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
    As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
    To buy his favour, I extend this friendship;
    If he will take it, so; if not, adieu;
    And, for my love, I pray you wrong me not.
  ANTONIO. Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.
  SHYLOCK. Then meet me forthwith at the notary's;
    Give him direction for this merry bond,
    And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
    See to my house, left in the fearful guard
    Of an unthrifty knave, and presently
    I'll be with you.  
  ANTONIO. Hie thee, gentle Jew.                    Exit SHYLOCK
    The Hebrew will turn Christian: he grows kind.
  BASSANIO. I like not fair terms and a villain's mind.
  ANTONIO. Come on; in this there can be no dismay;
    My ships come home a month before the day.            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE of MOROCCO, a tawny Moor all in white,
and three or four FOLLOWERS accordingly, with PORTIA, NERISSA, and train

  PRINCE OF Morocco. Mislike me not for my complexion,
    The shadowed livery of the burnish'd sun,
    To whom I am a neighbour, and near bred.
    Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
    Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles,
    And let us make incision for your love
    To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
    I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
    Hath fear'd the valiant; by my love, I swear
    The best-regarded virgins of our clime
    Have lov'd it too. I would not change this hue,
    Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.
  PORTIA. In terms of choice I am not solely led
    By nice direction of a maiden's eyes;
    Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny  
    Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.
    But, if my father had not scanted me,
    And hedg'd me by his wit to yield myself
    His wife who wins me by that means I told you,
    Yourself, renowned Prince, then stood as fair
    As any comer I have look'd on yet
    For my affection.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Even for that I thank you.
    Therefore, I pray you, lead me to the caskets
    To try my fortune. By this scimitar,
    That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
    That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
    I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look,
    Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth,
    Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
    Yea, mock the lion when 'a roars for prey,
    To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
    If Hercules and Lichas play at dice
    Which is the better man, the greater throw
    May turn by fortune from the weaker band.  
    So is Alcides beaten by his page;
    And so may I, blind Fortune leading me,
    Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
    And die with grieving.
  PORTIA. You must take your chance,
    And either not attempt to choose at all,
    Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong,
    Never to speak to lady afterward
    In way of marriage; therefore be advis'd.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Nor will not; come, bring me unto my chance.
  PORTIA. First, forward to the temple. After dinner
    Your hazard shall be made.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Good fortune then,
    To make me blest or cursed'st among men!
                                           [Cornets, and exeunt]




SCENE II.
Venice. A street

Enter LAUNCELOT GOBBO

  LAUNCELOT. Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this
    Jew my master. The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying
    to me 'Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, good Launcelot' or 'good Gobbo' or
    'good Launcelot Gobbo, use your legs, take the start, run away.'
    My conscience says 'No; take heed, honest Launcelot, take heed,
    honest Gobbo' or, as aforesaid, 'honest Launcelot Gobbo, do not
    run; scorn running with thy heels.' Well, the most courageous
    fiend bids me pack. 'Via!' says the fiend; 'away!' says the
    fiend. 'For the heavens, rouse up a brave mind' says the fiend
    'and run.' Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my
    heart, says very wisely to me 'My honest friend Launcelot, being
    an honest man's son' or rather 'an honest woman's son'; for
    indeed my father did something smack, something grow to, he had a
    kind of taste- well, my conscience says 'Launcelot, budge not.'
    'Budge,' says the fiend. 'Budge not,' says my conscience.
    'Conscience,' say I, (you counsel well.' 'Fiend,' say I, 'you
    counsel well.' To be rul'd by my conscience, I should stay with  
    the Jew my master, who- God bless the mark!- is a kind of devil;
    and, to run away from the Jew, I should be ruled by the fiend,
    who- saving your reverence!- is the devil himself. Certainly the
    Jew is the very devil incarnation; and, in my conscience, my
    conscience is but a kind of hard conscience to offer to counsel
    me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more friendly
    counsel. I will run, fiend; my heels are at your commandment; I
    will run.

                     Enter OLD GOBBO, with a basket

  GOBBO. Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way to
    master Jew's?
  LAUNCELOT.  [Aside]  O heavens! This is my true-begotten father,
    who, being more than sand-blind, high-gravel blind, knows me not.
    I will try confusions with him.
  GOBBO. Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way to
    master Jew's?
  LAUNCELOT. Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but, at
    the next turning of all, on your left; marry, at the very next  
    turning, turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the Jew's
    house.
  GOBBO. Be God's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit! Can you tell
    me whether one Launcelot, that dwells with him, dwell with him or
    no?
  LAUNCELOT. Talk you of young Master Launcelot?  [Aside]  Mark me
    now; now will I raise the waters.- Talk you of young Master
    Launcelot?
  GOBBO. No master, sir, but a poor man's son; his father, though I
    say't, is an honest exceeding poor man, and, God be thanked, well
    to live.
  LAUNCELOT. Well, let his father be what 'a will, we talk of young
    Master Launcelot.
  GOBBO. Your worship's friend, and Launcelot, sir.
  LAUNCELOT. But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech you, talk
    you of young Master Launcelot?
  GOBBO. Of Launcelot, an't please your mastership.
  LAUNCELOT. Ergo, Master Launcelot. Talk not of Master Launcelot,
    father; for the young gentleman, according to Fates and Destinies
    and such odd sayings, the Sisters Three and such branches of  
    learning, is indeed deceased; or, as you would say in plain
    terms, gone to heaven.
  GOBBO. Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff of my age, my
    very prop.
  LAUNCELOT. Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a
    prop? Do you know me, father?
  GOBBO. Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman; but I pray
    you tell me, is my boy- God rest his soul!- alive or dead?
  LAUNCELOT. Do you not know me, father?
  GOBBO. Alack, sir, I am sand-blind; I know you not.
  LAUNCELOT. Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might fail of the
    knowing me: it is a wise father that knows his own child. Well,
    old man, I will tell you news of your son. Give me your blessing;
    truth will come to light; murder cannot be hid long; a man's son
    may, but in the end truth will out.
  GOBBO. Pray you, sir, stand up; I am sure you are not Launcelot my
    boy.
  LAUNCELOT. Pray you, let's have no more fooling about it, but give
    me your blessing; I am Launcelot, your boy that was, your son
    that is, your child that shall be.  
  GOBBO. I cannot think you are my son.
  LAUNCELOT. I know not what I shall think of that; but I am
    Launcelot, the Jew's man, and I am sure Margery your wife is my
    mother.
  GOBBO. Her name is Margery, indeed. I'll be sworn, if thou be
    Launcelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood. Lord worshipp'd
    might he be, what a beard hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair
    on thy chin than Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.
  LAUNCELOT. It should seem, then, that Dobbin's tail grows backward;
    I am sure he had more hair of his tail than I have of my face
    when I last saw him.
  GOBBO. Lord, how art thou chang'd! How dost thou and thy master
    agree? I have brought him a present. How 'gree you now?
  LAUNCELOT. Well, well; but, for mine own part, as I have set up my
    rest to run away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground.
    My master's a very Jew. Give him a present! Give him a halter. I
    am famish'd in his service; you may tell every finger I have with
    my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come; give me your present to
    one Master Bassanio, who indeed gives rare new liveries; if I
    serve not him, I will run as far as God has any ground. O rare  
    fortune! Here comes the man. To him, father, for I am a Jew, if I
    serve the Jew any longer.

         Enter BASSANIO, with LEONARDO, with a FOLLOWER or two

  BASSANIO. You may do so; but let it be so hasted that supper be
    ready at the farthest by five of the clock. See these letters
    delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to
    come anon to my lodging.                      Exit a SERVANT
  LAUNCELOT. To him, father.
  GOBBO. God bless your worship!
  BASSANIO. Gramercy; wouldst thou aught with me?
  GOBBO. Here's my son, sir, a poor boy-
  LAUNCELOT. Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew's man, that would,
    sir, as my father shall specify-
  GOBBO. He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve-
  LAUNCELOT. Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and
    have a desire, as my father shall specify-
  GOBBO. His master and he, saving your worship's reverence, are
    scarce cater-cousins-  
  LAUNCELOT. To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew, having done
    me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being I hope an old man,
    shall frutify unto you-
  GOBBO. I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your
    worship; and my suit is-
  LAUNCELOT. In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as
    your worship shall know by this honest old man; and, though I say
    it, though old man, yet poor man, my father.
  BASSANIO. One speak for both. What would you?
  LAUNCELOT. Serve you, sir.
  GOBBO. That is the very defect of the matter, sir.
  BASSANIO. I know thee well; thou hast obtain'd thy suit.
    Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
    And hath preferr'd thee, if it be preferment
    To leave a rich Jew's service to become
    The follower of so poor a gentleman.
  LAUNCELOT. The old proverb is very well parted between my master
    Shylock and you, sir: you have the grace of God, sir, and he hath
    enough.
  BASSANIO. Thou speak'st it well. Go, father, with thy son.  
    Take leave of thy old master, and inquire
    My lodging out.  [To a SERVANT]  Give him a livery
    More guarded than his fellows'; see it done.
  LAUNCELOT. Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have ne'er a
    tongue in my head!  [Looking on his palm]  Well; if any man in
    Italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book- I
    shall have good fortune. Go to, here's a simple line of life;
    here's a small trifle of wives; alas, fifteen wives is nothing;
    a'leven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one man.
    And then to scape drowning thrice, and to be in peril of my life
    with the edge of a feather-bed-here are simple scapes. Well, if
    Fortune be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear. Father,
    come; I'll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling.
                                  Exeunt LAUNCELOT and OLD GOBBO
  BASSANIO. I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this.
    These things being bought and orderly bestowed,
    Return in haste, for I do feast to-night
    My best esteem'd acquaintance; hie thee, go.
  LEONARDO. My best endeavours shall be done herein.
  
                          Enter GRATIANO

  GRATIANO. Where's your master?
  LEONARDO. Yonder, sir, he walks.                          Exit
  GRATIANO. Signior Bassanio!
  BASSANIO. Gratiano!
  GRATIANO. I have suit to you.
  BASSANIO. You have obtain'd it.
  GRATIANO. You must not deny me: I must go with you to Belmont.
  BASSANIO. Why, then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano:
    Thou art too wild, too rude, and bold of voice-
    Parts that become thee happily enough,
    And in such eyes as ours appear not faults;
    But where thou art not known, why there they show
    Something too liberal. Pray thee, take pain
    To allay with some cold drops of modesty
    Thy skipping spirit; lest through thy wild behaviour
    I be misconst'red in the place I go to
    And lose my hopes.
  GRATIANO. Signior Bassanio, hear me:  
    If I do not put on a sober habit,
    Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
    Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely,
    Nay more, while grace is saying hood mine eyes
    Thus with my hat, and sigh, and say amen,
    Use all the observance of civility
    Like one well studied in a sad ostent
    To please his grandam, never trust me more.
  BASSANIO. Well, we shall see your bearing.
  GRATIANO. Nay, but I bar to-night; you shall not gauge me
    By what we do to-night.
  BASSANIO. No, that were pity;
    I would entreat you rather to put on
    Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
    That purpose merriment. But fare you well;
    I have some business.
  GRATIANO. And I must to Lorenzo and the rest;
    But we will visit you at supper-time.                 Exeunt




SCENE III.
Venice. SHYLOCK'S house

Enter JESSICA and LAUNCELOT

  JESSICA. I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.
    Our house is hell; and thou, a merry devil,
    Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.
    But fare thee well; there is a ducat for thee;
    And, Launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see
    Lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest.
    Give him this letter; do it secretly.
    And so farewell. I would not have my father
    See me in talk with thee.
  LAUNCELOT. Adieu! tears exhibit my tongue. Most beautiful pagan,
    most sweet Jew! If a Christian do not play the knave and get
    thee, I am much deceived. But, adieu! these foolish drops do
    something drown my manly spirit; adieu!
  JESSICA. Farewell, good Launcelot.              Exit LAUNCELOT
    Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
    To be asham'd to be my father's child!
    But though I am a daughter to his blood,  
    I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo,
    If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
    Become a Christian and thy loving wife.                 Exit




SCENE IV.
Venice. A street

Enter GRATIANO, LORENZO, SALERIO, and SOLANIO

  LORENZO. Nay, we will slink away in suppertime,
    Disguise us at my lodging, and return
    All in an hour.
  GRATIANO. We have not made good preparation.
  SALERIO. We have not spoke us yet of torch-bearers.
  SOLANIO. 'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered;
    And better in my mind not undertook.
  LORENZO. 'Tis now but four o'clock; we have two hours
    To furnish us.

                 Enter LAUNCELOT, With a letter

    Friend Launcelot, what's the news?
  LAUNCELOT. An it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem
    to signify.
  LORENZO. I know the hand; in faith, 'tis a fair hand,
    And whiter than the paper it writ on  
    Is the fair hand that writ.
  GRATIANO. Love-news, in faith!
  LAUNCELOT. By your leave, sir.
  LORENZO. Whither goest thou?
  LAUNCELOT. Marry, sir, to bid my old master, the Jew, to sup
    to-night with my new master, the Christian.
  LORENZO. Hold, here, take this. Tell gentle Jessica
    I will not fail her; speak it privately.
    Go, gentlemen,                                Exit LAUNCELOT
    Will you prepare you for this masque to-night?
    I am provided of a torch-bearer.
  SALERIO. Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight.
  SOLANIO. And so will I.
  LORENZO. Meet me and Gratiano
    At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence.
  SALERIO. 'Tis good we do so.        Exeunt SALERIO and SOLANIO
  GRATIANO. Was not that letter from fair Jessica?
  LORENZO. I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed
    How I shall take her from her father's house;
    What gold and jewels she is furnish'd with;  
    What page's suit she hath in readiness.
    If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
    It will be for his gentle daughter's sake;
    And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
    Unless she do it under this excuse,
    That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
    Come, go with me, peruse this as thou goest;
    Fair Jessica shall be my torch-bearer.                Exeunt




SCENE V.
Venice. Before SHYLOCK'S house

Enter SHYLOCK and LAUNCELOT

  SHYLOCK. Well, thou shalt see; thy eyes shall be thy judge,
    The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.-
    What, Jessica!- Thou shalt not gormandize
    As thou hast done with me- What, Jessica!-
    And sleep and snore, and rend apparel out-
    Why, Jessica, I say!
  LAUNCELOT. Why, Jessica!
  SHYLOCK. Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
  LAUNCELOT. Your worship was wont to tell me I could do nothing
    without bidding.

                          Enter JESSICA

  JESSICA. Call you? What is your will?
  SHYLOCK. I am bid forth to supper, Jessica;
    There are my keys. But wherefore should I go?
    I am not bid for love; they flatter me;  
    But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon
    The prodigal Christian. Jessica, my girl,
    Look to my house. I am right loath to go;
    There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest,
    For I did dream of money-bags to-night.
  LAUNCELOT. I beseech you, sir, go; my young master doth expect your
    reproach.
  SHYLOCK. So do I his.
  LAUNCELOT. And they have conspired together; I will not say you
    shall see a masque, but if you do, then it was not for nothing
    that my nose fell a-bleeding on Black Monday last at six o'clock
    i' th' morning, falling out that year on Ash Wednesday was four
    year, in th' afternoon.
  SHYLOCK. What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica:
    Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum,
    And the vile squealing of the wry-neck'd fife,
    Clamber not you up to the casements then,
    Nor thrust your head into the public street
    To gaze on Christian fools with varnish'd faces;
    But stop my house's ears- I mean my casements;  
    Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter
    My sober house. By Jacob's staff, I swear
    I have no mind of feasting forth to-night;
    But I will go. Go you before me, sirrah;
    Say I will come.
  LAUNCELOT. I will go before, sir. Mistress, look out at window for
    all this.
        There will come a Christian by
        Will be worth a Jewess' eye.                        Exit
  SHYLOCK. What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?
  JESSICA. His words were 'Farewell, mistress'; nothing else.
  SHYLOCK. The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
    Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
    More than the wild-cat; drones hive not with me,
    Therefore I part with him; and part with him
    To one that I would have him help to waste
    His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in;
    Perhaps I will return immediately.
    Do as I bid you, shut doors after you.
    Fast bind, fast find-  
    A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.                  Exit
  JESSICA. Farewell; and if my fortune be not crost,
    I have a father, you a daughter, lost.                  Exit




SCENE VI.
Venice. Before SHYLOCK'S house

Enter the maskers, GRATIANO and SALERIO

  GRATIANO. This is the pent-house under which Lorenzo
    Desired us to make stand.
  SALERIO. His hour is almost past.
  GRATIANO. And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour,
    For lovers ever run before the clock.
  SALERIO. O, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly
    To seal love's bonds new made than they are wont
    To keep obliged faith unforfeited!
  GRATIANO. That ever holds: who riseth from a feast
    With that keen appetite that he sits down?
    Where is the horse that doth untread again
    His tedious measures with the unbated fire
    That he did pace them first? All things that are
    Are with more spirit chased than enjoyed.
    How like a younker or a prodigal
    The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
    Hugg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind;  
    How like the prodigal doth she return,
    With over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails,
    Lean, rent, and beggar'd by the strumpet wind!

                       Enter LORENZO

  SALERIO. Here comes Lorenzo; more of this hereafter.
  LORENZO. Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode!
    Not I, but my affairs, have made you wait.
    When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
    I'll watch as long for you then. Approach;
    Here dwells my father Jew. Ho! who's within?

           Enter JESSICA, above, in boy's clothes

  JESSICA. Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty,
    Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.
  LORENZO. Lorenzo, and thy love.
  JESSICA. Lorenzo, certain; and my love indeed;
    For who love I so much? And now who knows  
    But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?
  LORENZO. Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.
  JESSICA. Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
    I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me,
    For I am much asham'd of my exchange;
    But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
    The pretty follies that themselves commit,
    For, if they could, Cupid himself would blush
    To see me thus transformed to a boy.
  LORENZO. Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.
  JESSICA. What! must I hold a candle to my shames?
    They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
    Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
    And I should be obscur'd.
  LORENZO. So are you, sweet,
    Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
    But come at once,
    For the close night doth play the runaway,
    And we are stay'd for at Bassanio's feast.
  JESSICA. I will make fast the doors, and gild myself  
    With some moe ducats, and be with you straight.
                                                      Exit above

  GRATIANO. Now, by my hood, a gentle, and no Jew.
  LORENZO. Beshrew me, but I love her heartily,
    For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
    And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
    And true she is, as she hath prov'd herself;
    And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,
    Shall she be placed in my constant soul.

                     Enter JESSICA, below

    What, art thou come? On, gentlemen, away;
    Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.
                                   Exit with JESSICA and SALERIO

                        Enter ANTONIO

  ANTONIO. Who's there?  
  GRATIANO. Signior Antonio?
  ANTONIO. Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
    'Tis nine o'clock; our friends all stay for you;
    No masque to-night; the wind is come about;
    Bassanio presently will go aboard;
    I have sent twenty out to seek for you.
  GRATIANO. I am glad on't; I desire no more delight
    Than to be under sail and gone to-night.              Exeunt




SCENE VII.
Belmont. PORTIA's house

Flourish of cornets. Enter PORTIA, with the PRINCE OF MOROCCO,
and their trains

  PORTIA. Go draw aside the curtains and discover
    The several caskets to this noble Prince.
    Now make your choice.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. The first, of gold, who this inscription bears:
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.'
    The second, silver, which this promise carries:
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
    This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt:
    'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'
    How shall I know if I do choose the right?
  PORTIA. The one of them contains my picture, Prince;
    If you choose that, then I am yours withal.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Some god direct my judgment! Let me see;
    I will survey th' inscriptions back again.
    What says this leaden casket?
    'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'  
    Must give- for what? For lead? Hazard for lead!
    This casket threatens; men that hazard all
    Do it in hope of fair advantages.
    A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross;
    I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
    What says the silver with her virgin hue?
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
    As much as he deserves! Pause there, Morocco,
    And weigh thy value with an even hand.
    If thou beest rated by thy estimation,
    Thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough
    May not extend so far as to the lady;
    And yet to be afeard of my deserving
    Were but a weak disabling of myself.
    As much as I deserve? Why, that's the lady!
    I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
    In graces, and in qualities of breeding;
    But more than these, in love I do deserve.
    What if I stray'd no farther, but chose here?
    Let's see once more this saying grav'd in gold:  
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.'
    Why, that's the lady! All the world desires her;
    From the four corners of the earth they come
    To kiss this shrine, this mortal-breathing saint.
    The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
    Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now
    For princes to come view fair Portia.
    The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head
    Spits in the face of heaven, is no bar
    To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
    As o'er a brook to see fair Portia.
    One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
    Is't like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation
    To think so base a thought; it were too gross
    To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
    Or shall I think in silver she's immur'd,
    Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
    O sinful thought! Never so rich a gem
    Was set in worse than gold. They have in England
    A coin that bears the figure of an angel  
    Stamp'd in gold; but that's insculp'd upon.
    But here an angel in a golden bed
    Lies all within. Deliver me the key;
    Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may!
  PORTIA. There, take it, Prince, and if my form lie there,
    Then I am yours.                [He opens the golden casket]
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. O hell! what have we here?
    A carrion Death, within whose empty eye
    There is a written scroll! I'll read the writing.
         'All that glisters is not gold,
         Often have you heard that told;
         Many a man his life hath sold
         But my outside to behold.
         Gilded tombs do worms infold.
         Had you been as wise as bold,
         Young in limbs, in judgment old,
         Your answer had not been inscroll'd.
         Fare you well, your suit is cold.'
      Cold indeed, and labour lost,
      Then farewell, heat, and welcome, frost.  
    Portia, adieu! I have too griev'd a heart
    To take a tedious leave; thus losers part.
                        Exit with his train. Flourish of cornets
  PORTIA. A gentle riddance. Draw the curtains, go.
    Let all of his complexion choose me so.               Exeunt




SCENE VIII.
Venice. A street

Enter SALERIO and SOLANIO

  SALERIO. Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
    With him is Gratiano gone along;
    And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.
  SOLANIO. The villain Jew with outcries rais'd the Duke,
    Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.
  SALERIO. He came too late, the ship was under sail;
    But there the Duke was given to understand
    That in a gondola were seen together
    Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica;
    Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
    They were not with Bassanio in his ship.
  SOLANIO. I never heard a passion so confus'd,
    So strange, outrageous, and so variable,
    As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
    'My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter!
    Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
    Justice! the law! My ducats and my daughter!  
    A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
    Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter!
    And jewels- two stones, two rich and precious stones,
    Stol'n by my daughter! Justice! Find the girl;
    She hath the stones upon her and the ducats.'
  SALERIO. Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
    Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.
  SOLANIO. Let good Antonio look he keep his day,
    Or he shall pay for this.
  SALERIO. Marry, well rememb'red;
    I reason'd with a Frenchman yesterday,
    Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
    The French and English, there miscarried
    A vessel of our country richly fraught.
    I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
    And wish'd in silence that it were not his.
  SOLANIO. You were best to tell Antonio what you hear;
    Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.
  SALERIO. A kinder gentleman treads not the earth.
    I saw Bassanio and Antonio part.  
    Bassanio told him he would make some speed
    Of his return. He answered 'Do not so;
    Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
    But stay the very riping of the time;
    And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
    Let it not enter in your mind of love;
    Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
    To courtship, and such fair ostents of love
    As shall conveniently become you there.'
    And even there, his eye being big with tears,
    Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
    And with affection wondrous sensible
    He wrung Bassanio's hand; and so they parted.
  SOLANIO. I think he only loves the world for him.
    I pray thee, let us go and find him out,
    And quicken his embraced heaviness
    With some delight or other.
  SALERIO. Do we so.                                      Exeunt




SCENE IX.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Enter NERISSA, and a SERVITOR

  NERISSA. Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight;
    The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath,
    And comes to his election presently.

       Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON,
                    PORTIA, and their trains

  PORTIA. Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince.
    If you choose that wherein I am contain'd,
    Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemniz'd;
    But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
    You must be gone from hence immediately.
  ARRAGON. I am enjoin'd by oath to observe three things:
    First, never to unfold to any one
    Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail
    Of the right casket, never in my life
    To woo a maid in way of marriage;  
    Lastly,
    If I do fail in fortune of my choice,
    Immediately to leave you and be gone.
  PORTIA. To these injunctions every one doth swear
    That comes to hazard for my worthless self.
  ARRAGON. And so have I address'd me. Fortune now
    To my heart's hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
    'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'
    You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
    What says the golden chest? Ha! let me see:
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.'
    What many men desire- that 'many' may be meant
    By the fool multitude, that choose by show,
    Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach;
    Which pries not to th' interior, but, like the martlet,
    Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
    Even in the force and road of casualty.
    I will not choose what many men desire,
    Because I will not jump with common spirits
    And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.  
    Why, then to thee, thou silver treasure-house!
    Tell me once more what title thou dost bear.
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
    And well said too; for who shall go about
    To cozen fortune, and be honourable
    Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
    To wear an undeserved dignity.
    O that estates, degrees, and offices,
    Were not deriv'd corruptly, and that clear honour
    Were purchas'd by the merit of the wearer!
    How many then should cover that stand bare!
    How many be commanded that command!
    How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
    From the true seed of honour! and how much honour
    Pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times,
    To be new varnish'd! Well, but to my choice.
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
    I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
    And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
                                    [He opens the silver casket]  
  PORTIA.  [Aside]  Too long a pause for that which you find there.
  ARRAGON. What's here? The portrait of a blinking idiot
    Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.
    How much unlike art thou to Portia!
    How much unlike my hopes and my deservings!
    'Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.'
    Did I deserve no more than a fool's head?
    Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?
  PORTIA. To offend and judge are distinct offices
    And of opposed natures.
  ARRAGON. What is here?  [Reads]

         'The fire seven times tried this;
         Seven times tried that judgment is
         That did never choose amiss.
         Some there be that shadows kiss,
         Such have but a shadow's bliss.
         There be fools alive iwis
         Silver'd o'er, and so was this.
         Take what wife you will to bed,  
         I will ever be your head.
         So be gone; you are sped.'

         Still more fool I shall appear
         By the time I linger here.
         With one fool's head I came to woo,
         But I go away with two.
         Sweet, adieu! I'll keep my oath,
         Patiently to bear my wroth.         Exit with his train

  PORTIA. Thus hath the candle sing'd the moth.
    O, these deliberate fools! When they do choose,
    They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.
  NERISSA. The ancient saying is no heresy:
    Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
  PORTIA. Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.

                       Enter a SERVANT

  SERVANT. Where is my lady?  
  PORTIA. Here; what would my lord?
  SERVANT. Madam, there is alighted at your gate
    A young Venetian, one that comes before
    To signify th' approaching of his lord,
    From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
    To wit, besides commends and courteous breath,
    Gifts of rich value. Yet I have not seen
    So likely an ambassador of love.
    A day in April never came so sweet
    To show how costly summer was at hand
    As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.
  PORTIA. No more, I pray thee; I am half afeard
    Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
    Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him.
    Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
    Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly.
  NERISSA. Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!        Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
Venice. A street

Enter SOLANIO and SALERIO

  SOLANIO. Now, what news on the Rialto?
  SALERIO. Why, yet it lives there uncheck'd that Antonio hath a ship
    of rich lading wreck'd on the narrow seas; the Goodwins I think
    they call the place, a very dangerous flat and fatal, where the
    carcases of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my
    gossip Report be an honest woman of her word.
  SOLANIO. I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapp'd
    ginger or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a
    third husband. But it is true, without any slips of prolixity or
    crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the
    honest Antonio- O that I had a title good enough to keep his name
    company!-
  SALERIO. Come, the full stop.
  SOLANIO. Ha! What sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath lost a
    ship.
  SALERIO. I would it might prove the end of his losses.
  SOLANIO. Let me say amen betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer,  
    for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.

                             Enter SHYLOCK

    How now, Shylock? What news among the merchants?
  SHYLOCK. You knew, none so well, none so well as you, of my
    daughter's flight.
  SALERIO. That's certain; I, for my part, knew the tailor that made
    the wings she flew withal.
  SOLANIO. And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was flidge;
    and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.
  SHYLOCK. She is damn'd for it.
  SALERIO. That's certain, if the devil may be her judge.
  SHYLOCK. My own flesh and blood to rebel!
  SOLANIO. Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these years?
  SHYLOCK. I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood.
  SALERIO. There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than
    between jet and ivory; more between your bloods than there is
    between red wine and Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether
    Antonio have had any loss at sea or no?  
  SHYLOCK. There I have another bad match: a bankrupt, a prodigal,
    who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto; a beggar, that was
    us'd to come so smug upon the mart. Let him look to his bond. He
    was wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond. He was wont
    to lend money for a Christian courtesy; let him look to his bond.
  SALERIO. Why, I am sure, if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his
    flesh. What's that good for?
  SHYLOCK. To bait fish withal. If it will feed nothing else, it will
    feed my revenge. He hath disgrac'd me and hind'red me half a
    million; laugh'd at my losses, mock'd at my gains, scorned my
    nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine
    enemies. And what's his reason? I am a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes?
    Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections,
    passions, fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons,
    subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed
    and cooled by the same winter and summer, as a Christian is? If
    you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh?
    If you poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall we
    not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you
    in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility?  
    Revenge. If a Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance
    be by Christian example? Why, revenge. The villainy you teach me
    I will execute; and itshall go hard but I will better the
    instruction.

                    Enter a MAN from ANTONIO

  MAN. Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house, and desires to
    speak with you both.
  SALERIO. We have been up and down to seek him.

                          Enter TUBAL

  SOLANIO. Here comes another of the tribe; a third cannot be
    match'd, unless the devil himself turn Jew.
                                Exeunt SOLANIO, SALERIO, and MAN
  SHYLOCK. How now, Tubal, what news from Genoa? Hast thou found my
    daughter?
  TUBAL. I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.
  SHYLOCK. Why there, there, there, there! A diamond gone, cost me  
    two thousand ducats in Frankfort! The curse never fell upon our
    nation till now; I never felt it till now. Two thousand ducats in
    that, and other precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter
    were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear; would she were
    hears'd at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin! No news of
    them? Why, so- and I know not what's spent in the search. Why,
    thou- loss upon loss! The thief gone with so much, and so much to
    find the thief; and no satisfaction, no revenge; nor no ill luck
    stirring but what lights o' my shoulders; no sighs but o' my
    breathing; no tears but o' my shedding!
  TUBAL. Yes, other men have ill luck too: Antonio, as I heard in
    Genoa-
  SHYLOCK. What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?
  TUBAL. Hath an argosy cast away coming from Tripolis.
  SHYLOCK. I thank God, I thank God. Is it true, is it true?
  TUBAL. I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wreck.
  SHYLOCK. I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good news- ha, ha!-
    heard in Genoa.
  TUBAL. Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one night,
    fourscore ducats.  
  SHYLOCK. Thou stick'st a dagger in me- I shall never see my gold
    again. Fourscore ducats at a sitting! Fourscore ducats!
  TUBAL. There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my company to
    Venice that swear he cannot choose but break.
  SHYLOCK. I am very glad of it; I'll plague him, I'll torture him; I
    am glad of it.
  TUBAL. One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter
    for a monkey.
  SHYLOCK. Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It was my
    turquoise; I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor; I would not
    have given it for a wilderness of monkeys.
  TUBAL. But Antonio is certainly undone.
  SHYLOCK. Nay, that's true; that's very true. Go, Tubal, fee me an
    officer; bespeak him a fortnight before. I will have the heart of
    him, if he forfeit; for, were he out of Venice, I can make what
    merchandise I will. Go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue; go,
    good Tubal; at our synagogue, Tubal.                  Exeunt




SCENE II.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Enter BASSANIO, PORTIA, GRATIANO, NERISSA, and all their trains

  PORTIA. I pray you tarry; pause a day or two
    Before you hazard; for, in choosing wrong,
    I lose your company; therefore forbear a while.
    There's something tells me- but it is not love-
    I would not lose you; and you know yourself
    Hate counsels not in such a quality.
    But lest you should not understand me well-
    And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought-
    I would detain you here some month or two
    Before you venture for me. I could teach you
    How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;
    So will I never be; so may you miss me;
    But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin,
    That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes!
    They have o'erlook'd me and divided me;
    One half of me is yours, the other half yours-  
    Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
    And so all yours. O! these naughty times
    Puts bars between the owners and their rights;
    And so, though yours, not yours. Prove it so,
    Let fortune go to hell for it, not I.
    I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time,
    To eke it, and to draw it out in length,
    To stay you from election.
  BASSANIO. Let me choose;
    For as I am, I live upon the rack.
  PORTIA. Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess
    What treason there is mingled with your love.
  BASSANIO. None but that ugly treason of mistrust
    Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love;
    There may as well be amity and life
    'Tween snow and fire as treason and my love.
  PORTIA. Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack,
    Where men enforced do speak anything.
  BASSANIO. Promise me life, and I'll confess the truth.
  PORTIA. Well then, confess and live.  
  BASSANIO. 'Confess' and 'love'
    Had been the very sum of my confession.
    O happy torment, when my torturer
    Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
    But let me to my fortune and the caskets.
  PORTIA. Away, then; I am lock'd in one of them.
    If you do love me, you will find me out.
    Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof;
    Let music sound while he doth make his choice;
    Then, if he lose, he makes a swan-like end,
    Fading in music. That the comparison
    May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
    And wat'ry death-bed for him. He may win;
    And what is music then? Then music is
    Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
    To a new-crowned monarch; such it is
    As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
    That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear
    And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,
    With no less presence, but with much more love,  
    Than young Alcides when he did redeem
    The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
    To the sea-monster. I stand for sacrifice;
    The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
    With bleared visages come forth to view
    The issue of th' exploit. Go, Hercules!
    Live thou, I live. With much much more dismay
    I view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray.

                            A SONG

      the whilst BASSANIO comments on the caskets to himself

                 Tell me where is fancy bred,
                 Or in the heart or in the head,
                 How begot, how nourished?
                   Reply, reply.
                 It is engend'red in the eyes,
                 With gazing fed; and fancy dies
                 In the cradle where it lies.  
                   Let us all ring fancy's knell:
                   I'll begin it- Ding, dong, bell.
  ALL.           Ding, dong, bell.

  BASSANIO. So may the outward shows be least themselves;
    The world is still deceiv'd with ornament.
    In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt
    But, being season'd with a gracious voice,
    Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
    What damned error but some sober brow
    Will bless it, and approve it with a text,
    Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
    There is no vice so simple but assumes
    Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.
    How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false
    As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
    The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars;
    Who, inward search'd, have livers white as milk!
    And these assume but valour's excrement
    To render them redoubted. Look on beauty  
    And you shall see 'tis purchas'd by the weight,
    Which therein works a miracle in nature,
    Making them lightest that wear most of it;
    So are those crisped snaky golden locks
    Which make such wanton gambols with the wind
    Upon supposed fairness often known
    To be the dowry of a second head-
    The skull that bred them in the sepulchre.
    Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
    To a most dangerous sea; the beauteous scarf
    Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,
    The seeming truth which cunning times put on
    To entrap the wisest. Therefore, thou gaudy gold,
    Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee;
    Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
    'Tween man and man; but thou, thou meagre lead,
    Which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught,
    Thy plainness moves me more than eloquence,
    And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!
  PORTIA.  [Aside]  How all the other passions fleet to air,  
    As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embrac'd despair,
    And shudd'ring fear, and green-ey'd jealousy!
    O love, be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
    In measure rain thy joy, scant this excess!
    I feel too much thy blessing. Make it less,
    For fear I surfeit.
  BASSANIO.  [Opening the leaden casket]  What find I here?
    Fair Portia's counterfeit! What demi-god
    Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
    Or whether riding on the balls of mine
    Seem they in motion? Here are sever'd lips,
    Parted with sugar breath; so sweet a bar
    Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs
    The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
    A golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men
    Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes-
    How could he see to do them? Having made one,
    Methinks it should have power to steal both his,
    And leave itself unfurnish'd. Yet look how far
    The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow  
    In underprizing it, so far this shadow
    Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll,
    The continent and summary of my fortune.
         'You that choose not by the view,
         Chance as fair and choose as true!
         Since this fortune falls to you,
         Be content and seek no new.
         If you be well pleas'd with this,
         And hold your fortune for your bliss,
         Turn to where your lady is
         And claim her with a loving kiss.'
    A gentle scroll. Fair lady, by your leave;
    I come by note, to give and to receive.
    Like one of two contending in a prize,
    That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes,
    Hearing applause and universal shout,
    Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
    Whether those peals of praise be his or no;
    So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,
    As doubtful whether what I see be true,  
    Until confirm'd, sign'd, ratified by you.
  PORTIA. You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
    Such as I am. Though for myself alone
    I would not be ambitious in my wish
    To wish myself much better, yet for you
    I would be trebled twenty times myself,
    A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich,
    That only to stand high in your account
    I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
    Exceed account. But the full sum of me
    Is sum of something which, to term in gross,
    Is an unlesson'd girl, unschool'd, unpractis'd;
    Happy in this, she is not yet so old
    But she may learn; happier than this,
    She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
    Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit
    Commits itself to yours to be directed,
    As from her lord, her governor, her king.
    Myself and what is mine to you and yours
    Is now converted. But now I was the lord  
    Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
    Queen o'er myself; and even now, but now,
    This house, these servants, and this same myself,
    Are yours- my lord's. I give them with this ring,
    Which when you part from, lose, or give away,
    Let it presage the ruin of your love,
    And be my vantage to exclaim on you.
  BASSANIO. Madam, you have bereft me of all words;
    Only my blood speaks to you in my veins;
    And there is such confusion in my powers
    As, after some oration fairly spoke
    By a beloved prince, there doth appear
    Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
    Where every something, being blent together,
    Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
    Express'd and not express'd. But when this ring
    Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence;
    O, then be bold to say Bassanio's dead!
  NERISSA. My lord and lady, it is now our time
    That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper  
    To cry 'Good joy.' Good joy, my lord and lady!
  GRATIANO. My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle lady,
    I wish you all the joy that you can wish,
    For I am sure you can wish none from me;
    And, when your honours mean to solemnize
    The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you
    Even at that time I may be married too.
  BASSANIO. With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.
  GRATIANO. I thank your lordship, you have got me one.
    My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
    You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid;
    You lov'd, I lov'd; for intermission
    No more pertains to me, my lord, than you.
    Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
    And so did mine too, as the matter falls;
    For wooing here until I sweat again,
    And swearing till my very roof was dry
    With oaths of love, at last- if promise last-
    I got a promise of this fair one here
    To have her love, provided that your fortune  
    Achiev'd her mistress.
  PORTIA. Is this true, Nerissa?
  NERISSA. Madam, it is, so you stand pleas'd withal.
  BASSANIO. And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?
  GRATIANO. Yes, faith, my lord.
  BASSANIO. Our feast shall be much honoured in your marriage.
  GRATIANO. We'll play with them: the first boy for a thousand
    ducats.
  NERISSA. What, and stake down?
  GRATIANO. No; we shall ne'er win at that sport, and stake down-
    But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
    What, and my old Venetian friend, Salerio!

          Enter LORENZO, JESSICA, and SALERIO, a messenger
                           from Venice

  BASSANIO. Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither,
    If that the youth of my new int'rest here
    Have power to bid you welcome. By your leave,
    I bid my very friends and countrymen,  
    Sweet Portia, welcome.
  PORTIA. So do I, my lord;
    They are entirely welcome.
  LORENZO. I thank your honour. For my part, my lord,
    My purpose was not to have seen you here;
    But meeting with Salerio by the way,
    He did entreat me, past all saying nay,
    To come with him along.
  SALERIO. I did, my lord,
    And I have reason for it. Signior Antonio
    Commends him to you.               [Gives BASSANIO a letter]
  BASSANIO. Ere I ope his letter,
    I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.
  SALERIO. Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind;
    Nor well, unless in mind; his letter there
    Will show you his estate.        [BASSANIO opens the letter]
  GRATIANO. Nerissa, cheer yond stranger; bid her welcome.
    Your hand, Salerio. What's the news from Venice?
    How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?
    I know he will be glad of our success:  
    We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.
  SALERIO. I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.
  PORTIA. There are some shrewd contents in yond same paper
    That steals the colour from Bassanio's cheek:
    Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
    Could turn so much the constitution
    Of any constant man. What, worse and worse!
    With leave, Bassanio: I am half yourself,
    And I must freely have the half of anything
    That this same paper brings you.
  BASSANIO. O sweet Portia,
    Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
    That ever blotted paper! Gentle lady,
    When I did first impart my love to you,
    I freely told you all the wealth I had
    Ran in my veins- I was a gentleman;
    And then I told you true. And yet, dear lady,
    Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
    How much I was a braggart. When I told you
    My state was nothing, I should then have told you  
    That I was worse than nothing; for indeed
    I have engag'd myself to a dear friend,
    Engag'd my friend to his mere enemy,
    To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
    The paper as the body of my friend,
    And every word in it a gaping wound
    Issuing life-blood. But is it true, Salerio?
    Hath all his ventures fail'd? What, not one hit?
    From Tripolis, from Mexico, and England,
    From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
    And not one vessel scape the dreadful touch
    Of merchant-marring rocks?
  SALERIO. Not one, my lord.
    Besides, it should appear that, if he had
    The present money to discharge the Jew,
    He would not take it. Never did I know
    A creature that did bear the shape of man
    So keen and greedy to confound a man.
    He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
    And doth impeach the freedom of the state,  
    If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,
    The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
    Of greatest port, have all persuaded with him;
    But none can drive him from the envious plea
    Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.
  JESSICA. When I was with him, I have heard him swear
    To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
    That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
    Than twenty times the value of the sum
    That he did owe him; and I know, my lord,
    If law, authority, and power, deny not,
    It will go hard with poor Antonio.
  PORTIA. Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?
  BASSANIO. The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
    The best condition'd and unwearied spirit
    In doing courtesies; and one in whom
    The ancient Roman honour more appears
    Than any that draws breath in Italy.
  PORTIA. What sum owes he the Jew?
  BASSANIO. For me, three thousand ducats.  
  PORTIA. What! no more?
    Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond;
    Double six thousand, and then treble that,
    Before a friend of this description
    Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.
    First go with me to church and call me wife,
    And then away to Venice to your friend;
    For never shall you lie by Portia's side
    With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
    To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
    When it is paid, bring your true friend along.
    My maid Nerissa and myself meantime
    Will live as maids and widows. Come, away;
    For you shall hence upon your wedding day.
    Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
    Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
    But let me hear the letter of your friend.
  BASSANIO.  [Reads]  'Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried,
    my creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to the
    Jew is forfeit; and since, in paying it, it is impossible I  
    should live, all debts are clear'd between you and I, if I might
    but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use your pleasure; if
    your love do not persuade you to come, let not my letter.'
  PORTIA. O love, dispatch all business and be gone!
  BASSANIO. Since I have your good leave to go away,
    I will make haste; but, till I come again,
    No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay,
    Nor rest be interposer 'twixt us twain.               Exeunt




SCENE III.
Venice. A street

Enter SHYLOCK, SOLANIO, ANTONIO, and GAOLER

  SHYLOCK. Gaoler, look to him. Tell not me of mercy-
    This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
    Gaoler, look to him.
  ANTONIO. Hear me yet, good Shylock.
  SHYLOCK. I'll have my bond; speak not against my bond.
    I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond.
    Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
    But, since I am a dog, beware my fangs;
    The Duke shall grant me justice. I do wonder,
    Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond
    To come abroad with him at his request.
  ANTONIO. I pray thee hear me speak.
  SHYLOCK. I'll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak;
    I'll have my bond; and therefore speak no more.
    I'll not be made a soft and dull-ey'd fool,
    To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield,
    To Christian intercessors. Follow not;  
    I'll have no speaking; I will have my bond.             Exit
  SOLANIO. It is the most impenetrable cur
    That ever kept with men.
  ANTONIO. Let him alone;
    I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers.
    He seeks my life; his reason well I know:
    I oft deliver'd from his forfeitures
    Many that have at times made moan to me;
    Therefore he hates me.
  SOLANIO. I am sure the Duke
    Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.
  ANTONIO. The Duke cannot deny the course of law;
    For the commodity that strangers have
    With us in Venice, if it be denied,
    Will much impeach the justice of the state,
    Since that the trade and profit of the city
    Consisteth of all nations. Therefore, go;
    These griefs and losses have so bated me
    That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
    To-morrow to my bloody creditor.  
    Well, gaoler, on; pray God Bassanio come
    To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.          Exeunt




SCENE IV.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Enter PORTIA, NERISSA, LORENZO, JESSICA, and BALTHASAR

  LORENZO. Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
    You have a noble and a true conceit
    Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
    In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
    But if you knew to whom you show this honour,
    How true a gentleman you send relief,
    How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
    I know you would be prouder of the work
    Than customary bounty can enforce you.
  PORTIA. I never did repent for doing good,
    Nor shall not now; for in companions
    That do converse and waste the time together,
    Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
    There must be needs a like proportion
    Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit,
    Which makes me think that this Antonio,
    Being the bosom lover of my lord,  
    Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
    How little is the cost I have bestowed
    In purchasing the semblance of my soul
    From out the state of hellish cruelty!
    This comes too near the praising of myself;
    Therefore, no more of it; hear other things.
    Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
    The husbandry and manage of my house
    Until my lord's return; for mine own part,
    I have toward heaven breath'd a secret vow
    To live in prayer and contemplation,
    Only attended by Nerissa here,
    Until her husband and my lord's return.
    There is a monastery two miles off,
    And there we will abide. I do desire you
    Not to deny this imposition,
    The which my love and some necessity
    Now lays upon you.
  LORENZO. Madam, with all my heart
    I shall obey you in an fair commands.  
  PORTIA. My people do already know my mind,
    And will acknowledge you and Jessica
    In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.
    So fare you well till we shall meet again.
  LORENZO. Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!
  JESSICA. I wish your ladyship all heart's content.
  PORTIA. I thank you for your wish, and am well pleas'd
    To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.
                                      Exeunt JESSICA and LORENZO
    Now, Balthasar,
    As I have ever found thee honest-true,
    So let me find thee still. Take this same letter,
    And use thou all th' endeavour of a man
    In speed to Padua; see thou render this
    Into my cousin's hands, Doctor Bellario;
    And look what notes and garments he doth give thee,
    Bring them, I pray thee, with imagin'd speed
    Unto the traject, to the common ferry
    Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
    But get thee gone; I shall be there before thee.  
  BALTHASAR. Madam, I go with all convenient speed.         Exit
  PORTIA. Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand
    That you yet know not of; we'll see our husbands
    Before they think of us.
  NERISSA. Shall they see us?
  PORTIA. They shall, Nerissa; but in such a habit
    That they shall think we are accomplished
    With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager,
    When we are both accoutred like young men,
    I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
    And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
    And speak between the change of man and boy
    With a reed voice; and turn two mincing steps
    Into a manly stride; and speak of frays
    Like a fine bragging youth; and tell quaint lies,
    How honourable ladies sought my love,
    Which I denying, they fell sick and died-
    I could not do withal. Then I'll repent,
    And wish for all that, that I had not kill'd them.
    And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell,  
    That men shall swear I have discontinued school
    About a twelvemonth. I have within my mind
    A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks,
    Which I will practise.
  NERISSA. Why, shall we turn to men?
  PORTIA. Fie, what a question's that,
    If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
    But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
    When I am in my coach, which stays for us
    At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
    For we must measure twenty miles to-day.              Exeunt




SCENE V.
Belmont. The garden

Enter LAUNCELOT and JESSICA

  LAUNCELOT. Yes, truly; for, look you, the sins of the father are to
    be laid upon the children; therefore, I promise you, I fear you.
    I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of
    the matter; therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you are
    damn'd. There is but one hope in it that can do you any good, and
    that is but a kind of bastard hope, neither.
  JESSICA. And what hope is that, I pray thee?
  LAUNCELOT. Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not-
   that you are not the Jew's daughter.
  JESSICA. That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so the sins of my
    mother should be visited upon me.
  LAUNCELOT. Truly then I fear you are damn'd both by father and
    mother; thus when I shun Scylla, your father, I fall into
    Charybdis, your mother; well, you are gone both ways.
  JESSICA. I shall be sav'd by my husband; he hath made me a
    Christian.
  LAUNCELOT. Truly, the more to blame he; we were Christians enow  
    before, e'en as many as could well live one by another. This
    making of Christians will raise the price of hogs; if we grow all
    to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the
    coals for money.

                             Enter LORENZO

  JESSICA. I'll tell my husband, Launcelot, what you say; here he
    comes.
  LORENZO. I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelot, if you
    thus get my wife into corners.
  JESSICA. Nay, you need nor fear us, Lorenzo; Launcelot and I are
    out; he tells me flatly there's no mercy for me in heaven,
    because I am a Jew's daughter; and he says you are no good member
    of the commonwealth, for in converting Jews to Christians you
    raise the price of pork.
  LORENZO. I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you
    can the getting up of the negro's belly; the Moor is with child
    by you, Launcelot.
  LAUNCELOT. It is much that the Moor should be more than reason; but  
    if she be less than an honest woman, she is indeed more than I
    took her for.
  LORENZO. How every fool can play upon the word! I think the best
    grace of wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow
    commendable in none only but parrots. Go in, sirrah; bid them
    prepare for dinner.
  LAUNCELOT. That is done, sir; they have all stomachs.
  LORENZO. Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! Then bid them
    prepare dinner.
  LAUNCELOT. That is done too, sir, only 'cover' is the word.
  LORENZO. Will you cover, then, sir?
  LAUNCELOT. Not so, sir, neither; I know my duty.
  LORENZO. Yet more quarrelling with occasion! Wilt thou show the
    whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? I pray thee understand a
    plain man in his plain meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover
    the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.
  LAUNCELOT. For the table, sir, it shall be serv'd in; for the meat,
    sir, it shall be cover'd; for your coming in to dinner, sir, why,
    let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.
 Exit  
  LORENZO. O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
    The fool hath planted in his memory
    An army of good words; and I do know
    A many fools that stand in better place,
    Garnish'd like him, that for a tricksy word
    Defy the matter. How cheer'st thou, Jessica?
    And now, good sweet, say thy opinion,
    How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?
  JESSICA. Past all expressing. It is very meet
    The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
    For, having such a blessing in his lady,
    He finds the joys of heaven here on earth;
    And if on earth he do not merit it,
    In reason he should never come to heaven.
    Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
    And on the wager lay two earthly women,
    And Portia one, there must be something else
    Pawn'd with the other; for the poor rude world
    Hath not her fellow.
  LORENZO. Even such a husband  
    Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.
  JESSICA. Nay, but ask my opinion too of that.
  LORENZO. I will anon; first let us go to dinner.
  JESSICA. Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.
  LORENZO. No, pray thee, let it serve for table-talk;
    Then howsome'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things
    I shall digest it.
  JESSICA. Well, I'll set you forth.                      Exeunt




ACT IV. SCENE I.
Venice. The court of justice

Enter the DUKE, the MAGNIFICOES, ANTONIO, BASSANIO, GRATIANO, SALERIO,
and OTHERS

  DUKE OF VENICE. What, is Antonio here?
  ANTONIO. Ready, so please your Grace.
  DUKE OF VENICE. I am sorry for thee; thou art come to answer
    A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch,
    Uncapable of pity, void and empty
    From any dram of mercy.
  ANTONIO. I have heard
    Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify
    His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate,
    And that no lawful means can carry me
    Out of his envy's reach, I do oppose
    My patience to his fury, and am arm'd
    To suffer with a quietness of spirit
    The very tyranny and rage of his.
  DUKE OF VENICE. Go one, and call the Jew into the court.
  SALERIO. He is ready at the door; he comes, my lord.  

                          Enter SHYLOCK

  DUKE OF VENICE. Make room, and let him stand before our face.
    Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
    That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
    To the last hour of act; and then, 'tis thought,
    Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse, more strange
    Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
    And where thou now exacts the penalty,
    Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh,
    Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
    But, touch'd with human gentleness and love,
    Forgive a moiety of the principal,
    Glancing an eye of pity on his losses,
    That have of late so huddled on his back-
    Enow to press a royal merchant down,
    And pluck commiseration of his state
    From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
    From stubborn Turks and Tartars, never train'd  
    To offices of tender courtesy.
    We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.
  SHYLOCK. I have possess'd your Grace of what I purpose,
    And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
    To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
    If you deny it, let the danger light
    Upon your charter and your city's freedom.
    You'll ask me why I rather choose to have
    A weight of carrion flesh than to receive
    Three thousand ducats. I'll not answer that,
    But say it is my humour- is it answer'd?
    What if my house be troubled with a rat,
    And I be pleas'd to give ten thousand ducats
    To have it ban'd? What, are you answer'd yet?
    Some men there are love not a gaping pig;
    Some that are mad if they behold a cat;
    And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose,
    Cannot contain their urine; for affection,
    Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood
    Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer:  
    As there is no firm reason to be rend'red
    Why he cannot abide a gaping pig;
    Why he, a harmless necessary cat;
    Why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force
    Must yield to such inevitable shame
    As to offend, himself being offended;
    So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
    More than a lodg'd hate and a certain loathing
    I bear Antonio, that I follow thus
    A losing suit against him. Are you answered?
  BASSANIO. This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
    To excuse the current of thy cruelty.
  SHYLOCK. I am not bound to please thee with my answers.
  BASSANIO. Do all men kill the things they do not love?
  SHYLOCK. Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
  BASSANIO. Every offence is not a hate at first.
  SHYLOCK. What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?
  ANTONIO. I pray you, think you question with the Jew.
    You may as well go stand upon the beach
    And bid the main flood bate his usual height;  
    You may as well use question with the wolf,
    Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;
    You may as well forbid the mountain pines
    To wag their high tops and to make no noise
    When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;
    You may as well do anything most hard
    As seek to soften that- than which what's harder?-
    His jewish heart. Therefore, I do beseech you,
    Make no moe offers, use no farther means,
    But with all brief and plain conveniency
    Let me have judgment, and the Jew his will.
  BASSANIO. For thy three thousand ducats here is six.
  SHYLOCK. If every ducat in six thousand ducats
    Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
    I would not draw them; I would have my bond.
  DUKE OF VENICE. How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend'ring none?
  SHYLOCK. What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
    You have among you many a purchas'd slave,
    Which, fike your asses and your dogs and mules,
    You use in abject and in slavish parts,  
    Because you bought them; shall I say to you
    'Let them be free, marry them to your heirs-
    Why sweat they under burdens?- let their beds
    Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
    Be season'd with such viands'? You will answer
    'The slaves are ours.' So do I answer you:
    The pound of flesh which I demand of him
    Is dearly bought, 'tis mine, and I will have it.
    If you deny me, fie upon your law!
    There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
    I stand for judgment; answer; shall I have it?
  DUKE OF VENICE. Upon my power I may dismiss this court,
    Unless Bellario, a learned doctor,
    Whom I have sent for to determine this,
    Come here to-day.
  SALERIO. My lord, here stays without
    A messenger with letters from the doctor,
    New come from Padua.
  DUKE OF VENICE. Bring us the letters; call the messenger.
  BASSANIO. Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!  
    The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all,
    Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.
  ANTONIO. I am a tainted wether of the flock,
    Meetest for death; the weakest kind of fruit
    Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.
    You cannot better be employ'd, Bassanio,
    Than to live still, and write mine epitaph.

           Enter NERISSA dressed like a lawyer's clerk

  DUKE OF VENICE. Came you from Padua, from Bellario?
  NERISSA. From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.
                                             [Presents a letter]
  BASSANIO. Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?
  SHYLOCK. To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.
  GRATIANO. Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
    Thou mak'st thy knife keen; but no metal can,
    No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness
    Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?
  SHYLOCK. No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.  
  GRATIANO. O, be thou damn'd, inexecrable dog!
    And for thy life let justice be accus'd.
    Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith,
    To hold opinion with Pythagoras
    That souls of animals infuse themselves
    Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
    Govern'd a wolf who, hang'd for human slaughter,
    Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
    And, whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
    Infus'd itself in thee; for thy desires
    Are wolfish, bloody, starv'd and ravenous.
  SHYLOCK. Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
    Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud;
    Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
    To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.
  DUKE OF VENICE. This letter from Bellario doth commend
    A young and learned doctor to our court.
    Where is he?
  NERISSA. He attendeth here hard by
    To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.  
  DUKE OF VENICE. With all my heart. Some three or four of you
    Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
    Meantime, the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
  CLERK.  [Reads]  'Your Grace shall understand that at the receipt
    of your letter I am very sick; but in the instant that your
    messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a young doctor
    of Rome- his name is Balthazar. I acquainted him with the cause
    in controversy between the Jew and Antonio the merchant; we
    turn'd o'er many books together; he is furnished with my opinion
    which, bettered with his own learning-the greatness whereof I
    cannot enough commend- comes with him at my importunity to fill
    up your Grace's request in my stead. I beseech you let his lack
    of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation,
    for I never knew so young a body with so old a head. I leave him
    to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his
    commendation.'

      Enter PORTIA for BALTHAZAR, dressed like a Doctor of Laws

  DUKE OF VENICE. YOU hear the learn'd Bellario, what he writes;  
    And here, I take it, is the doctor come.
    Give me your hand; come you from old Bellario?
  PORTIA. I did, my lord.
  DUKE OF VENICE. You are welcome; take your place.
    Are you acquainted with the difference
    That holds this present question in the court?
  PORTIA. I am informed throughly of the cause.
    Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew?
  DUKE OF VENICE. Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.
  PORTIA. Is your name Shylock?
  SHYLOCK. Shylock is my name.
  PORTIA. Of a strange nature is the suit you follow;
    Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
    Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
    You stand within his danger, do you not?
  ANTONIO. Ay, so he says.
  PORTIA. Do you confess the bond?
  ANTONIO. I do.
  PORTIA. Then must the Jew be merciful.
  SHYLOCK. On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.  
  PORTIA. The quality of mercy is not strain'd;
    It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
    Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest:
    It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
    'Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
    The throned monarch better than his crown;
    His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
    The attribute to awe and majesty,
    Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
    But mercy is above this sceptred sway,
    It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
    It is an attribute to God himself;
    And earthly power doth then show likest God's
    When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
    Though justice be thy plea, consider this-
    That in the course of justice none of us
    Should see salvation; we do pray for mercy,
    And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
    The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
    To mitigate the justice of thy plea,  
    Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
    Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.
  SHYLOCK. My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
    The penalty and forfeit of my bond.
  BASSANIO. Yes; here I tender it for him in the court;
    Yea, twice the sum; if that will not suffice,
    I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er
    On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart;
    If this will not suffice, it must appear
    That malice bears down truth. And, I beseech you,
    Wrest once the law to your authority;
    To do a great right do a little wrong,
    And curb this cruel devil of his will.
  PORTIA. It must not be; there is no power in Venice
    Can alter a decree established;
    'Twill be recorded for a precedent,
    And many an error, by the same example,
    Will rush into the state; it cannot be.
  SHYLOCK. A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel!
    O wise young judge, how I do honour thee!  
  PORTIA. I pray you, let me look upon the bond.
  SHYLOCK. Here 'tis, most reverend Doctor; here it is.
  PORTIA. Shylock, there's thrice thy money off'red thee.
  SHYLOCK. An oath, an oath! I have an oath in heaven.
    Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
    No, not for Venice.
  PORTIA. Why, this bond is forfeit;
    And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
    A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
    Nearest the merchant's heart. Be merciful.
    Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.
  SHYLOCK. When it is paid according to the tenour.
    It doth appear you are a worthy judge;
    You know the law; your exposition
    Hath been most sound; I charge you by the law,
    Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,
    Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear
    There is no power in the tongue of man
    To alter me. I stay here on my bond.
  ANTONIO. Most heartily I do beseech the court  
    To give the judgment.
  PORTIA. Why then, thus it is:
    You must prepare your bosom for his knife.
  SHYLOCK. O noble judge! O excellent young man!
  PORTIA. For the intent and purpose of the law
    Hath full relation to the penalty,
    Which here appeareth due upon the bond.
  SHYLOCK. 'Tis very true. O wise and upright judge,
    How much more elder art thou than thy looks!
  PORTIA. Therefore, lay bare your bosom.
  SHYLOCK. Ay, his breast-
    So says the bond; doth it not, noble judge?
    'Nearest his heart,' those are the very words.
  PORTIA. It is so. Are there balance here to weigh
    The flesh?
  SHYLOCK. I have them ready.
  PORTIA. Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
    To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.
  SHYLOCK. Is it so nominated in the bond?
  PORTIA. It is not so express'd, but what of that?  
    'Twere good you do so much for charity.
  SHYLOCK. I cannot find it; 'tis not in the bond.
  PORTIA. You, merchant, have you anything to say?
  ANTONIO. But little: I am arm'd and well prepar'd.
    Give me your hand, Bassanio; fare you well.
    Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you,
    For herein Fortune shows herself more kind
    Than is her custom. It is still her use
    To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
    To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
    An age of poverty; from which ling'ring penance
    Of such misery doth she cut me off.
    Commend me to your honourable wife;
    Tell her the process of Antonio's end;
    Say how I lov'd you; speak me fair in death;
    And, when the tale is told, bid her be judge
    Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
    Repent but you that you shall lose your friend,
    And he repents not that he pays your debt;
    For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,  
    I'll pay it instantly with all my heart.
  BASSANIO. Antonio, I am married to a wife
    Which is as dear to me as life itself;
    But life itself, my wife, and all the world,
    Are not with me esteem'd above thy life;
    I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all
    Here to this devil, to deliver you.
  PORTIA. Your wife would give you little thanks for that,
    If she were by to hear you make the offer.
  GRATIANO. I have a wife who I protest I love;
    I would she were in heaven, so she could
    Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.
  NERISSA. 'Tis well you offer it behind her back;
    The wish would make else an unquiet house.
  SHYLOCK.  [Aside]  These be the Christian husbands! I have a
    daughter-
    Would any of the stock of Barrabas
    Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!-
    We trifle time; I pray thee pursue sentence.
  PORTIA. A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine.  
    The court awards it and the law doth give it.
  SHYLOCK. Most rightful judge!
  PORTIA. And you must cut this flesh from off his breast.
    The law allows it and the court awards it.
  SHYLOCK. Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare.
  PORTIA. Tarry a little; there is something else.
    This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood:
    The words expressly are 'a pound of flesh.'
    Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh;
    But, in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
    One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
    Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate
    Unto the state of Venice.
  GRATIANO. O upright judge! Mark, Jew. O learned judge!
  SHYLOCK. Is that the law?
  PORTIA. Thyself shalt see the act;
    For, as thou urgest justice, be assur'd
    Thou shalt have justice, more than thou desir'st.
  GRATIANO. O learned judge! Mark, Jew. A learned judge!
  SHYLOCK. I take this offer then: pay the bond thrice,  
    And let the Christian go.
  BASSANIO. Here is the money.
  PORTIA. Soft!
    The Jew shall have all justice. Soft! No haste.
    He shall have nothing but the penalty.
  GRATIANO. O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge!
  PORTIA. Therefore, prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
    Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
    But just a pound of flesh; if thou tak'st more
    Or less than a just pound- be it but so much
    As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
    Or the division of the twentieth part
    Of one poor scruple; nay, if the scale do turn
    But in the estimation of a hair-
    Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.
  GRATIANO. A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew!
    Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.
  PORTIA. Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.
  SHYLOCK. Give me my principal, and let me go.
  BASSANIO. I have it ready for thee; here it is.  
  PORTIA. He hath refus'd it in the open court;
    He shall have merely justice, and his bond.
  GRATIANO. A Daniel still say I, a second Daniel!
    I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.
  SHYLOCK. Shall I not have barely my principal?
  PORTIA. Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
    To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.
  SHYLOCK. Why, then the devil give him good of it!
    I'll stay no longer question.
  PORTIA. Tarry, Jew.
    The law hath yet another hold on you.
    It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
    If it be proved against an alien
    That by direct or indirect attempts
    He seek the life of any citizen,
    The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive
    Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
    Comes to the privy coffer of the state;
    And the offender's life lies in the mercy
    Of the Duke only, 'gainst all other voice.  
    In which predicament, I say, thou stand'st;
    For it appears by manifest proceeding
    That indirectly, and directly too,
    Thou hast contrived against the very life
    Of the defendant; and thou hast incurr'd
    The danger formerly by me rehears'd.
    Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.
  GRATIANO. Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself;
    And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
    Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
    Therefore thou must be hang'd at the state's charge.
  DUKE OF VENICE. That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
    I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it.
    For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's;
    The other half comes to the general state,
    Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.
  PORTIA. Ay, for the state; not for Antonio.
  SHYLOCK. Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that.
    You take my house when you do take the prop
    That doth sustain my house; you take my life  
    When you do take the means whereby I live.
  PORTIA. What mercy can you render him, Antonio?
  GRATIANO. A halter gratis; nothing else, for God's sake!
  ANTONIO. So please my lord the Duke and all the court
    To quit the fine for one half of his goods;
    I am content, so he will let me have
    The other half in use, to render it
    Upon his death unto the gentleman
    That lately stole his daughter-
    Two things provided more; that, for this favour,
    He presently become a Christian;
    The other, that he do record a gift,
    Here in the court, of all he dies possess'd
    Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.
  DUKE OF VENICE. He shall do this, or else I do recant
    The pardon that I late pronounced here.
  PORTIA. Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?
  SHYLOCK. I am content.
  PORTIA. Clerk, draw a deed of gift.
  SHYLOCK. I pray you, give me leave to go from hence;  
    I am not well; send the deed after me
    And I will sign it.
  DUKE OF VENICE. Get thee gone, but do it.
  GRATIANO. In christ'ning shalt thou have two god-fathers;
    Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,
    To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
                                                    Exit SHYLOCK
  DUKE OF VENICE. Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.
  PORTIA. I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon;
    I must away this night toward Padua,
    And it is meet I presently set forth.
  DUKE OF VENICE. I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.
    Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
    For in my mind you are much bound to him.
                             Exeunt DUKE, MAGNIFICOES, and train
  BASSANIO. Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
    Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
    Of grievous penalties; in lieu whereof
    Three thousand ducats, due unto the Jew,
    We freely cope your courteous pains withal.  
  ANTONIO. And stand indebted, over and above,
    In love and service to you evermore.
  PORTIA. He is well paid that is well satisfied,
    And I, delivering you, am satisfied,
    And therein do account myself well paid.
    My mind was never yet more mercenary.
    I pray you, know me when we meet again;
    I wish you well, and so I take my leave.
  BASSANIO. Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further;
    Take some remembrance of us, as a tribute,
    Not as fee. Grant me two things, I pray you,
    Not to deny me, and to pardon me.
  PORTIA. You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
    [To ANTONIO]  Give me your gloves, I'll wear them for your sake.
    [To BASSANIO]  And, for your love, I'll take this ring from you.
    Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more,
    And you in love shall not deny me this.
  BASSANIO. This ring, good sir- alas, it is a trifle;
    I will not shame myself to give you this.
  PORTIA. I will have nothing else but only this;  
    And now, methinks, I have a mind to it.
  BASSANIO.. There's more depends on this than on the value.
    The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
    And find it out by proclamation;
    Only for this, I pray you, pardon me.
  PORTIA. I see, sir, you are liberal in offers;
    You taught me first to beg, and now, methinks,
    You teach me how a beggar should be answer'd.
  BASSANIO. Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife;
    And, when she put it on, she made me vow
    That I should neither sell, nor give, nor lose it.
  PORTIA. That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
    And if your wife be not a mad woman,
    And know how well I have deserv'd this ring,
    She would not hold out enemy for ever
    For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you!
                                       Exeunt PORTIA and NERISSA
  ANTONIO. My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.
    Let his deservings, and my love withal,
    Be valued 'gainst your wife's commandment.  
  BASSANIO. Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him;
    Give him the ring, and bring him, if thou canst,
    Unto Antonio's house. Away, make haste.        Exit GRATIANO
    Come, you and I will thither presently;
    And in the morning early will we both
    Fly toward Belmont. Come, Antonio.                    Exeunt




SCENE II.
Venice. A street

Enter PORTIA and NERISSA

  PORTIA. Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed,
    And let him sign it; we'll away tonight,
    And be a day before our husbands home.
    This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

                          Enter GRATIANO

  GRATIANO. Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en.
    My Lord Bassanio, upon more advice,
    Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
    Your company at dinner.
  PORTIA. That cannot be.
    His ring I do accept most thankfully,
    And so, I pray you, tell him. Furthermore,
    I pray you show my youth old Shylock's house.
  GRATIANO. That will I do.
  NERISSA. Sir, I would speak with you.  
    [Aside to PORTIA]  I'll See if I can get my husband's ring,
    Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.
  PORTIA.  [To NERISSA]  Thou Mayst, I warrant. We shall have old
      swearing
    That they did give the rings away to men;
    But we'll outface them, and outswear them too.
    [Aloud]  Away, make haste, thou know'st where I will tarry.
  NERISSA. Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
                                                          Exeunt




ACT V. SCENE I.
Belmont. The garden before PORTIA'S house

Enter LORENZO and JESSICA

  LORENZO. The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
    When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
    And they did make no noise- in such a night,
    Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls,
    And sigh'd his soul toward the Grecian tents,
    Where Cressid lay that night.
  JESSICA. In such a night
    Did Thisby fearfully o'ertrip the dew,
    And saw the lion's shadow ere himself,
    And ran dismayed away.
  LORENZO. In such a night
    Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
    Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
    To come again to Carthage.
  JESSICA. In such a night
    Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
    That did renew old AEson.
 LORENZO. In such a night  
    Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
    And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
    As far as Belmont.
  JESSICA. In such a night
    Did young Lorenzo swear he lov'd her well,
    Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
    And ne'er a true one.
  LORENZO. In such a night
    Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
    Slander her love, and he forgave it her.
  JESSICA. I would out-night you, did no body come;
    But, hark, I hear the footing of a man.

                       Enter STEPHANO

  LORENZO. Who comes so fast in silence of the night?
  STEPHANO. A friend.
  LORENZO. A friend! What friend? Your name, I pray you, friend?
  STEPHANO. Stephano is my name, and I bring word
    My mistress will before the break of day  
    Be here at Belmont; she doth stray about
    By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays
    For happy wedlock hours.
  LORENZO. Who comes with her?
  STEPHANO. None but a holy hermit and her maid.
    I pray you, is my master yet return'd?
  LORENZO. He is not, nor we have not heard from him.
    But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
    And ceremoniously let us prepare
    Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

                         Enter LAUNCELOT

  LAUNCELOT. Sola, sola! wo ha, ho! sola, sola!
  LORENZO. Who calls?
  LAUNCELOT. Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master Lorenzo! Sola,
    sola!
  LORENZO. Leave holloaing, man. Here!
  LAUNCELOT. Sola! Where, where?
  LORENZO. Here!  
  LAUNCELOT. Tell him there's a post come from my master with his
    horn full of good news; my master will be here ere morning.
 Exit
  LORENZO. Sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming.
    And yet no matter- why should we go in?
    My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
    Within the house, your mistress is at hand;
    And bring your music forth into the air.       Exit STEPHANO
    How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
    Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
    Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
    Become the touches of sweet harmony.
    Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
    Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold;
    There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
    But in his motion like an angel sings,
    Still quiring to the young-ey'd cherubins;
    Such harmony is in immortal souls,
    But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
    Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.  

                          Enter MUSICIANS

    Come, ho, and wake Diana with a hymn;
    With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear.
    And draw her home with music.                        [Music]
  JESSICA. I am never merry when I hear sweet music.
  LORENZO. The reason is your spirits are attentive;
    For do but note a wild and wanton herd,
    Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
    Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
    Which is the hot condition of their blood-
    If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
    Or any air of music touch their ears,
    You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
    Their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze
    By the sweet power of music. Therefore the poet
    Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods;
    Since nought so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
    But music for the time doth change his nature.  
    The man that hath no music in himself,
    Nor is not mov'd with concord of sweet sounds,
    Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;
    The motions of his spirit are dull:as night,
    And his affections dark as Erebus.
    Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.

                    Enter PORTIA and NERISSA

  PORTIA. That light we see is burning in my hall.
    How far that little candle throws his beams!
    So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
  NERISSA. When the moon shone, we did not see the candle.
  PORTIA. So doth the greater glory dim the less:
    A substitute shines brightly as a king
    Until a king be by, and then his state
    Empties itself, as doth an inland brook
    Into the main of waters. Music! hark!
  NERISSA. It is your music, madam, of the house.
  PORTIA. Nothing is good, I see, without respect;  
    Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.
  NERISSA. Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.
  PORTIA. The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
    When neither is attended; and I think
    ne nightingale, if she should sing by day,
    When every goose is cackling, would be thought
    No better a musician than the wren.
    How many things by season season'd are
    To their right praise and true perfection!
    Peace, ho! The moon sleeps with Endymion,
    And would not be awak'd.                      [Music ceases]
  LORENZO. That is the voice,
    Or I am much deceiv'd, of Portia.
  PORTIA. He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
    By the bad voice.
  LORENZO. Dear lady, welcome home.
  PORTIA. We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,
    Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.
    Are they return'd?
  LORENZO. Madam, they are not yet;  
    But there is come a messenger before,
    To signify their coming.
  PORTIA.. Go in, Nerissa;
    Give order to my servants that they take
    No note at all of our being absent hence;
    Nor you, Lorenzo; Jessica, nor you.        [A tucket sounds]
  LORENZO. Your husband is at hand; I hear his trumpet.
    We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.
  PORTIA. This night methinks is but the daylight sick;
    It looks a little paler; 'tis a day
    Such as the day is when the sun is hid.

       Enter BASSANIO, ANTONIO, GRATIANO, and their followers

  BASSANIO. We should hold day with the Antipodes,
    If you would walk in absence of the sun.
  PORTIA. Let me give light, but let me not be light,
    For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
    And never be Bassanio so for me;
    But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.  
  BASSANIO. I thank you, madam; give welcome to my friend.
    This is the man, this is Antonio,
    To whom I am so infinitely bound.
  PORTIA. You should in all sense be much bound to him,
    For, as I hear, he was much bound for you.
  ANTONIO. No more than I am well acquitted of.
  PORTIA. Sir, you are very welcome to our house.
    It must appear in other ways than words,
    Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.
  GRATIANO.  [To NERISSA]  By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong;
    In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk.
    Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,
    Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.
  PORTIA. A quarrel, ho, already! What's the matter?
  GRATIANO. About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
    That she did give me, whose posy was
    For all the world like cutler's poetry
    Upon a knife, 'Love me, and leave me not.'
  NERISSA. What talk you of the posy or the value?
    You swore to me, when I did give it you,  
    That you would wear it till your hour of death,
    And that it should lie with you in your grave;
    Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
    You should have been respective and have kept it.
    Gave it a judge's clerk! No, God's my judge,
    The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it.
  GRATIANO. He will, an if he live to be a man.
  NERISSA. Ay, if a woman live to be a man.
  GRATIANO. Now by this hand I gave it to a youth,
    A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy
    No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk;
    A prating boy that begg'd it as a fee;
    I could not for my heart deny it him.
  PORTIA. You were to blame, I must be plain with you,
    To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,
    A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger
    And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
    I gave my love a ring, and made him swear
    Never to part with it, and here he stands;
    I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it  
    Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
    That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
    You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief;
    An 'twere to me, I should be mad at it.
  BASSANIO.  [Aside]  Why, I were best to cut my left hand off,
    And swear I lost the ring defending it.
  GRATIANO. My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
    Unto the judge that begg'd it, and indeed
    Deserv'd it too; and then the boy, his clerk,
    That took some pains in writing, he begg'd mine;
    And neither man nor master would take aught
    But the two rings.
  PORTIA. What ring gave you, my lord?
    Not that, I hope, which you receiv'd of me.
  BASSANIO. If I could add a lie unto a fault,
    I would deny it; but you see my finger
    Hath not the ring upon it; it is gone.
  PORTIA. Even so void is your false heart of truth;
    By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed
    Until I see the ring.  
  NERISSA. Nor I in yours
    Till I again see mine.
  BASSANIO. Sweet Portia,
    If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
    If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
    And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
    And how unwillingly I left the ring,
    When nought would be accepted but the ring,
    You would abate the strength of your displeasure.
  PORTIA. If you had known the virtue of the ring,
    Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
    Or your own honour to contain the ring,
    You would not then have parted with the ring.
    What man is there so much unreasonable,
    If you had pleas'd to have defended it
    With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
    To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
    Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
    I'll die for't but some woman had the ring.
  BASSANIO. No, by my honour, madam, by my soul,  
    No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
    Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me,
    And begg'd the ring; the which I did deny him,
    And suffer'd him to go displeas'd away-
    Even he that had held up the very life
    Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
    I was enforc'd to send it after him;
    I was beset with shame and courtesy;
    My honour would not let ingratitude
    So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady;
    For by these blessed candles of the night,
    Had you been there, I think you would have begg'd
    The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.
  PORTIA. Let not that doctor e'er come near my house;
    Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
    And that which you did swear to keep for me,
    I will become as liberal as you;
    I'll not deny him anything I have,
    No, not my body, nor my husband's bed.
    Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.  
    Lie not a night from home; watch me like Argus;
    If you do not, if I be left alone,
    Now, by mine honour which is yet mine own,
    I'll have that doctor for mine bedfellow.
  NERISSA. And I his clerk; therefore be well advis'd
    How you do leave me to mine own protection.
  GRATIANO. Well, do you so, let not me take him then;
    For, if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.
  ANTONIO. I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.
  PORTIA. Sir, grieve not you; you are welcome not withstanding.
  BASSANIO. Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong;
    And in the hearing of these many friends
    I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
    Wherein I see myself-
  PORTIA. Mark you but that!
    In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
    In each eye one; swear by your double self,
    And there's an oath of credit.
  BASSANIO. Nay, but hear me.
    Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear  
    I never more will break an oath with thee.
  ANTONIO. I once did lend my body for his wealth,
    Which, but for him that had your husband's ring,
    Had quite miscarried; I dare be bound again,
    My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
    Will never more break faith advisedly.
  PORTIA. Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,
    And bid him keep it better than the other.
  ANTONIO. Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.
  BASSANIO. By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!
  PORTIA. I had it of him. Pardon me, Bassanio,
    For, by this ring, the doctor lay with me.
  NERISSA. And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
    For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
    In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
  GRATIANO. Why, this is like the mending of highways
    In summer, where the ways are fair enough.
    What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserv'd it?
  PORTIA. Speak not so grossly. You are all amaz'd.
    Here is a letter; read it at your leisure;  
    It comes from Padua, from Bellario;
    There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
    Nerissa there her clerk. Lorenzo here
    Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
    And even but now return'd; I have not yet
    Enter'd my house. Antonio, you are welcome;
    And I have better news in store for you
    Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon;
    There you shall find three of your argosies
    Are richly come to harbour suddenly.
    You shall not know by what strange accident
    I chanced on this letter.
  ANTONIO. I am dumb.
  BASSANIO. Were you the doctor, and I knew you not?
  GRATIANO. Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
  NERISSA. Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
    Unless he live until he be a man.
  BASSANIO. Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow;
    When I am absent, then lie with my wife.
  ANTONIO. Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;  
    For here I read for certain that my ships
    Are safely come to road.
  PORTIA. How now, Lorenzo!
    My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.
  NERISSA. Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
    There do I give to you and Jessica,
    From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
    After his death, of all he dies possess'd of.
  LORENZO. Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
    Of starved people.
  PORTIA. It is almost morning,
    And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
    Of these events at full. Let us go in,
    And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
    And we will answer all things faithfully.
  GRATIANO. Let it be so. The first inter'gatory
    That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is,
    Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
    Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
    But were the day come, I should wish it dark,  
    Till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.
    Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
    So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.               Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1601

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  SIR JOHN FALSTAFF
  FENTON, a young gentleman
  SHALLOW, a country justice
  SLENDER, cousin to Shallow

    Gentlemen of Windsor
  FORD
  PAGE
  WILLIAM PAGE, a boy, son to Page
  SIR HUGH EVANS, a Welsh parson
  DOCTOR CAIUS, a French physician
  HOST of the Garter Inn

    Followers of Falstaff
  BARDOLPH
  PISTOL
  NYM
  ROBIN, page to Falstaff
  SIMPLE, servant to Slender
  RUGBY, servant to Doctor Caius  

  MISTRESS FORD
  MISTRESS PAGE
  MISTRESS ANNE PAGE, her daughter
  MISTRESS QUICKLY, servant to Doctor Caius
  SERVANTS to Page, Ford, etc.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Windsor, and the neighbourhood


The Merry Wives of Windsor



ACT I. SCENE 1.

Windsor. Before PAGE'S house

Enter JUSTICE SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SIR HUGH EVANS

  SHALLOW. Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star
    Chamber matter of it; if he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs,
    he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
  SLENDER. In the county of Gloucester, Justice of Peace, and
    Coram.
  SHALLOW. Ay, cousin Slender, and Custalorum.
  SLENDER. Ay, and Ratolorum too; and a gentleman born,
    Master Parson, who writes himself 'Armigero' in any bill,
    warrant, quittance, or obligation-'Armigero.'
  SHALLOW. Ay, that I do; and have done any time these three
    hundred years.
  SLENDER. All his successors, gone before him, hath done't;
    and all his ancestors, that come after him, may: they may
    give the dozen white luces in their coat.
  SHALLOW. It is an old coat.
  EVANS. The dozen white louses do become an old coat well;  
    it agrees well, passant; it is a familiar beast to man, and
    signifies love.
  SHALLOW. The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old
    coat.
  SLENDER. I may quarter, coz.
  SHALLOW. You may, by marrying.
  EVANS. It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
  SHALLOW. Not a whit.
  EVANS. Yes, py'r lady! If he has a quarter of your coat, there
    is but three skirts for yourself, in my simple conjectures;
    but that is all one. If Sir John Falstaff have committed
    disparagements unto you, I am of the church, and will be
    glad to do my benevolence, to make atonements and
    compremises between you.
  SHALLOW. The Council shall hear it; it is a riot.
  EVANS. It is not meet the Council hear a riot; there is no
    fear of Got in a riot; the Council, look you, shall desire
    to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a riot; take your
    vizaments in that.
  SHALLOW. Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the sword  
    should end it.
  EVANS. It is petter that friends is the sword and end it;
    and there is also another device in my prain, which
    peradventure prings goot discretions with it. There is Anne
    Page, which is daughter to Master George Page, which is
    pretty virginity.
  SLENDER. Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and
    speaks small like a woman.
  EVANS. It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as you
    will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys, and
    gold, and silver, is her grandsire upon his death's-bed-Got
    deliver to a joyful resurrections!-give, when she is able to
    overtake seventeen years old. It were a goot motion if we
    leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage
    between Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.
  SHALLOW. Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
  EVANS. Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
  SHALLOW. I know the young gentlewoman; she has good
    gifts.
  EVANS. Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.  
  SHALLOW. Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff
    there?
  EVANS. Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do
    despise one that is false; or as I despise one that is not
    true. The knight Sir John is there; and, I beseech you, be
    ruled by your well-willers. I will peat the door for Master
    Page.
    [Knocks]  What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
  PAGE.  [Within]  Who's there?

                            Enter PAGE

  EVANS. Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and Justice
  Shallow; and here young Master Slender, that peradventures
    shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your
    likings.
  PAGE. I am glad to see your worships well. I thank you for
    my venison, Master Shallow.
  SHALLOW. Master Page, I am glad to see you; much good do
    it your good heart! I wish'd your venison better; it was ill  
    kill'd. How doth good Mistress Page?-and I thank you
    always with my heart, la! with my heart.
  PAGE. Sir, I thank you.
  SHALLOW. Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.
  PAGE. I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
  SLENDER. How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say
    he was outrun on Cotsall.
  PAGE. It could not be judg'd, sir.
  SLENDER. You'll not confess, you'll not confess.
  SHALLOW. That he will not. 'Tis your fault; 'tis your fault;
    'tis a good dog.
  PAGE. A cur, sir.
  SHALLOW. Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog. Can there be
    more said? He is good, and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff here?
  PAGE. Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good office
    between you.
  EVANS. It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
  SHALLOW. He hath wrong'd me, Master Page.
  PAGE. Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
  SHALLOW. If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that  
    so, Master Page? He hath wrong'd me; indeed he hath; at a
    word, he hath, believe me; Robert Shallow, esquire, saith
    he is wronged.
  PAGE. Here comes Sir John.

      Enter SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, BARDOLPH, NYM, and PISTOL

  FALSTAFF. Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to
    the King?
  SHALLOW. Knight, you have beaten my men, kill'd my deer,
    and broke open my lodge.
  FALSTAFF. But not kiss'd your keeper's daughter.
  SHALLOW. Tut, a pin! this shall be answer'd.
  FALSTAFF. I will answer it straight: I have done all this.
    That is now answer'd.
  SHALLOW. The Council shall know this.
  FALSTAFF. 'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel:
    you'll be laugh'd at.
  EVANS. Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.
  FALSTAFF. Good worts! good cabbage! Slender, I broke your  
    head; what matter have you against me?
  SLENDER. Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you;
    and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph, Nym,
    and Pistol. They carried me to the tavern, and made me
    drunk, and afterwards pick'd my pocket.
  BARDOLPH. You Banbury cheese!
  SLENDER. Ay, it is no matter.
  PISTOL. How now, Mephostophilus!
  SLENDER. Ay, it is no matter.
  NYM. Slice, I say! pauca, pauca; slice! That's my humour.
  SLENDER. Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
  EVANS. Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is
    three umpires in this matter, as I understand: that is,
    Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is myself,
    fidelicet myself; and the three party is, lastly and
    finally, mine host of the Garter.
  PAGE. We three to hear it and end it between them.
  EVANS. Fery goot. I will make a prief of it in my note-book;
    and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with as great
    discreetly as we can.  
  FALSTAFF. Pistol!
  PISTOL. He hears with ears.
  EVANS. The tevil and his tam! What phrase is this, 'He hears
    with ear'? Why, it is affectations.
  FALSTAFF. Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?
  SLENDER. Ay, by these gloves, did he-or I would I might
    never come in mine own great chamber again else!-of
    seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two Edward
    shovel-boards that cost me two shilling and two pence apiece
    of Yead Miller, by these gloves.
  FALSTAFF. Is this true, Pistol?
  EVANS. No, it is false, if it is a pick-purse.
  PISTOL. Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and master
    mine,
    I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
    Word of denial in thy labras here!
    Word of denial! Froth and scum, thou liest.
  SLENDER. By these gloves, then, 'twas he.
  NYM. Be avis'd, sir, and pass good humours; I will say
    'marry trap' with you, if you run the nuthook's humour on  
    me; that is the very note of it.
  SLENDER. By this hat, then, he in the red face had it; for
    though I cannot remember what I did when you made me
    drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.
  FALSTAFF. What say you, Scarlet and John?
  BARDOLPH. Why, sir, for my part, I say the gentleman had
    drunk himself out of his five sentences.
  EVANS. It is his five senses; fie, what the ignorance is!
  BARDOLPH. And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashier'd;
    and so conclusions pass'd the careers.
  SLENDER. Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but 'tis no matter;
    I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again, but in honest,
    civil, godly company, for this trick. If I be drunk, I'll be
    drunk with those that have the fear of God, and not with
    drunken knaves.
  EVANS. So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
  FALSTAFF. You hear all these matters deni'd, gentlemen; you
    hear it.

          Enter MISTRESS ANNE PAGE with wine; MISTRESS  
               FORD and MISTRESS PAGE, following

  PAGE. Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; we'll drink within.
                                                  Exit ANNE PAGE
  SLENDER. O heaven! this is Mistress Anne Page.
  PAGE. How now, Mistress Ford!
  FALSTAFF. Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well
    met; by your leave, good mistress.              [Kisses her]
  PAGE. Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
    hot venison pasty to dinner; come, gentlemen, I hope we
    shall drink down all unkindness.
                      Exeunt all but SHALLOW, SLENDER, and EVANS
  SLENDER. I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of
    Songs and Sonnets here.

                          Enter SIMPLE

    How, Simple! Where have you been? I must wait on
    myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles about you,
    have you?  
  SIMPLE. Book of Riddles! Why, did you not lend it to Alice
    Shortcake upon Allhallowmas last, a fortnight afore
    Michaelmas?
  SHALLOW. Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. A word
    with you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a
    tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh here. Do
    you understand me?
  SLENDER. Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so, I
    shall do that that is reason.
  SHALLOW. Nay, but understand me.
  SLENDER. So I do, sir.
  EVANS. Give ear to his motions: Master Slender, I will
    description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
  SLENDER. Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says; I pray
    you pardon me; he's a justice of peace in his country,
    simple though I stand here.
  EVANS. But that is not the question. The question is
    concerning your marriage.
  SHALLOW. Ay, there's the point, sir.
  EVANS. Marry is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne  
    Page.
  SLENDER. Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any
    reasonable demands.
  EVANS. But can you affection the oman? Let us command to
    know that of your mouth or of your lips; for divers philosophers
    hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth. Therefore,
    precisely, can you carry your good will to the maid?
  SHALLOW. Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
  SLENDER. I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that
    would do reason.
  EVANS. Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak possitable,
    if you can carry her your desires towards her.
  SHALLOW. That you must. Will you, upon good dowry,
    marry her?
  SLENDER. I will do a greater thing than that upon your request,
    cousin, in any reason.
  SHALLOW. Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz; what
    I do is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?
  SLENDER. I will marry her, sir, at your request; but if there
    be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease  
    it upon better acquaintance, when we are married and
    have more occasion to know one another. I hope upon
    familiarity will grow more contempt. But if you say
    'marry her,' I will marry her; that I am freely dissolved,
    and dissolutely.
  EVANS. It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in the
    ord 'dissolutely': the ort is, according to our meaning,
    'resolutely'; his meaning is good.
  SHALLOW. Ay, I think my cousin meant well.
  SLENDER. Ay, or else I would I might be hang'd, la!

                       Re-enter ANNE PAGE

  SHALLOW. Here comes fair Mistress Anne. Would I were
    young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
  ANNE. The dinner is on the table; my father desires your
    worships' company.
  SHALLOW. I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne!
  EVANS. Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
                                        Exeunt SHALLOW and EVANS  
  ANNE. Will't please your worship to come in, sir?
  SLENDER. No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very
    well.
  ANNE. The dinner attends you, sir.
  SLENDER. I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. Go,
    sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait upon my cousin
  Shallow.  [Exit SIMPLE]  A justice of peace sometime may
    be beholding to his friend for a man. I keep but three men
    and a boy yet, till my mother be dead. But what though?
    Yet I live like a poor gentleman born.
  ANNE. I may not go in without your worship; they will not
    sit till you come.
  SLENDER. I' faith, I'll eat nothing; I thank you as much as
    though I did.
  ANNE. I pray you, sir, walk in.
  SLENDER. I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruis'd my
    shin th' other day with playing at sword and dagger with
    a master of fence-three veneys for a dish of stew'd prunes
    -and, I with my ward defending my head, he hot my shin,
    and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat  
    since. Why do your dogs bark so? Be there bears i' th'
    town?
  ANNE. I think there are, sir; I heard them talk'd of.
  SLENDER. I love the sport well; but I shall as soon quarrel at
    it as any man in England. You are afraid, if you see the
    bear loose, are you not?
  ANNE. Ay, indeed, sir.
  SLENDER. That's meat and drink to me now. I have seen
    Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by the
    chain; but I warrant you, the women have so cried and
    shriek'd at it that it pass'd; but women, indeed, cannot
    abide 'em; they are very ill-favour'd rough things.

                         Re-enter PAGE

  PAGE. Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.
  SLENDER. I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.
  PAGE. By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! Come,
    come.
  SLENDER. Nay, pray you lead the way.  
  PAGE. Come on, sir.
  SLENDER. Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.
  ANNE. Not I, sir; pray you keep on.
  SLENDER. Truly, I will not go first; truly, la! I will not do
    you that wrong.
  ANNE. I pray you, sir.
  SLENDER. I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome. You
    do yourself wrong indeed, la!                         Exeunt




SCENE 2.

Before PAGE'S house

Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE

  EVANS. Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house which
    is the way; and there dwells one Mistress Quickly, which
    is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry nurse, or his cook,
    or his laundry, his washer, and his wringer.
  SIMPLE. Well, sir.
  EVANS. Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter; for it is a
    oman that altogether's acquaintance with Mistress Anne
    Page; and the letter is to desire and require her to solicit
    your master's desires to Mistress Anne Page. I pray you
    be gone. I will make an end of my dinner; there's pippins
    and cheese to come.                                   Exeunt




SCENE 3.

The Garter Inn

Enter FALSTAFF, HOST, BARDOLPH, NYM, PISTOL, and ROBIN

  FALSTAFF. Mine host of the Garter!
  HOST. What says my bully rook? Speak scholarly and
    wisely.
  FALSTAFF. Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my
    followers.
  HOST. Discard, bully Hercules; cashier; let them wag; trot,
    trot.
  FALSTAFF. I sit at ten pounds a week.
  HOST. Thou'rt an emperor-Caesar, Keiser, and Pheazar. I
    will entertain Bardolph; he shall draw, he shall tap; said I
    well, bully Hector?
  FALSTAFF. Do so, good mine host.
  HOST. I have spoke; let him follow.  [To BARDOLPH]  Let me
    see thee froth and lime. I am at a word; follow.   Exit HOST
  FALSTAFF. Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good trade;
    an old cloak makes a new jerkin; a wither'd serving-man a  
    fresh tapster. Go; adieu.
  BARDOLPH. It is a life that I have desir'd; I will thrive.
  PISTOL. O base Hungarian wight! Wilt thou the spigot
    wield?                                         Exit BARDOLPH
  NYM. He was gotten in drink. Is not the humour conceited?
  FALSTAFF. I am glad I am so acquit of this tinder-box: his
    thefts were too open; his filching was like an unskilful
    singer-he kept not time.
  NYM. The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest.
  PISTOL. 'Convey' the wise it call. 'Steal' foh! A fico for the
    phrase!
  FALSTAFF. Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.
  PISTOL. Why, then, let kibes ensue.
  FALSTAFF. There is no remedy; I must cony-catch; I must
    shift.
  PISTOL. Young ravens must have food.
  FALSTAFF. Which of you know Ford of this town?
  PISTOL. I ken the wight; he is of substance good.
  FALSTAFF. My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.
  PISTOL. Two yards, and more.  
  FALSTAFF. No quips now, Pistol. Indeed, I am in the waist
    two yards about; but I am now about no waste; I am about
    thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make love to Ford's wife; I
    spy entertainment in her; she discourses, she carves, she
    gives the leer of invitation; I can construe the action of her
    familiar style; and the hardest voice of her behaviour, to be
    English'd rightly, is 'I am Sir John Falstaff's.'
    PISTOL. He hath studied her well, and translated her will out
    of honesty into English.
  NYM. The anchor is deep; will that humour pass?
  FALSTAFF. Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her
    husband's purse; he hath a legion of angels.
  PISTOL. As many devils entertain; and 'To her, boy,' say I.
  NYM. The humour rises; it is good; humour me the angels.
  FALSTAFF. I have writ me here a letter to her; and here
    another to Page's wife, who even now gave me good eyes
    too, examin'd my parts with most judicious oeillades;
    sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot, sometimes my
    portly belly.
  PISTOL. Then did the sun on dunghill shine.  
  NYM. I thank thee for that humour.
  FALSTAFF. O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with such
    a greedy intention that the appetite of her eye did seem to
    scorch me up like a burning-glass! Here's another letter to
    her. She bears the purse too; she is a region in Guiana, all
    gold and bounty. I will be cheaters to them both, and they
    shall be exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West
    Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go, bear thou this
    letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to Mistress Ford. We
    will thrive, lads, we will thrive.
  PISTOL. Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
    And by my side wear steel? Then Lucifer take all!
  NYM. I will run no base humour. Here, take the
    humour-letter; I will keep the haviour of reputation.
  FALSTAFF.  [To ROBIN]  Hold, sirrah; bear you these letters
    tightly;
    Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
    Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go;
    Trudge, plod away i' th' hoof; seek shelter, pack!
    Falstaff will learn the humour of the age;  
    French thrift, you rogues; myself, and skirted page.
                                       Exeunt FALSTAFF and ROBIN
  PISTOL. Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam
    holds,
    And high and low beguiles the rich and poor;
    Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
    Base Phrygian Turk!
  NYM. I have operations in my head which be humours of
    revenge.
  PISTOL. Wilt thou revenge?
  NYM. By welkin and her star!
  PISTOL. With wit or steel?
  NYM. With both the humours, I.
    I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.
  PISTOL. And I to Ford shall eke unfold
    How Falstaff, varlet vile,
    His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
    And his soft couch defile.
  NYM. My humour shall not cool; I will incense Page to deal
    with poison; I will possess him with yellowness; for the  
    revolt of mine is dangerous. That is my true humour.
  PISTOL. Thou art the Mars of malcontents; I second thee;
    troop on.                                             Exeunt




SCENE 4.

DOCTOR CAIUS'S house

Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY, SIMPLE, and RUGBY

  QUICKLY. What, John Rugby! I pray thee go to the casement
    and see if you can see my master, Master Doctor
    Caius, coming. If he do, i' faith, and find anybody in the
    house, here will be an old abusing of God's patience and
    the King's English.
  RUGBY. I'll go watch.
  QUICKLY. Go; and we'll have a posset for't soon at night, in
    faith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire.  [Exit RUGBY]  An
    honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall come in
    house withal; and, I warrant you, no tell-tale nor no
    breed-bate; his worst fault is that he is given to prayer; he is
    something peevish that way; but nobody but has his fault;
    but let that pass. Peter Simple you say your name is?
  SIMPLE. Ay, for fault of a better.
  QUICKLY. And Master Slender's your master?
  SIMPLE. Ay, forsooth.  
  QUICKLY. Does he not wear a great round beard, like a
    glover's paring-knife?
  SIMPLE. No, forsooth; he hath but a little whey face, with a
    little yellow beard, a Cain-colour'd beard.
  QUICKLY. A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
  SIMPLE. Ay, forsooth; but he is as tall a man of his hands as
    any is between this and his head; he hath fought with a
    warrener.
  QUICKLY. How say you? O, I should remember him. Does
    he not hold up his head, as it were, and strut in his gait?
  SIMPLE. Yes, indeed, does he.
  QUICKLY. Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune!
    Tell Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your
    master. Anne is a good girl, and I wish-

                         Re-enter RUGBY

  RUGBY. Out, alas! here comes my master.
  QUICKLY. We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young
    man; go into this closet.  [Shuts SIMPLE in the closet]  He  
    will not stay long. What, John Rugby! John! what, John,
    I say! Go, John, go inquire for my master; I doubt he be
    not well that he comes not home.  [Singing]
    And down, down, adown-a, etc.

                       Enter DOCTOR CAIUS

  CAIUS. Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you, go
    and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert-a box, a green-a
    box. Do intend vat I speak? A green-a box.
  QUICKLY. Ay, forsooth, I'll fetch it you.  [Aside]  I am glad
    he went not in himself; if he had found the young man,
    he would have been horn-mad.
  CAIUS. Fe, fe, fe fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je m'en vais a
    la cour-la grande affaire.
  QUICKLY. Is it this, sir?
  CAIUS. Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly. Vere
    is dat knave, Rugby?
  QUICKLY. What, John Rugby? John!
  RUGBY. Here, sir.  
  CAIUS. You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby.
    Come, take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the
    court.
  RUGBY. 'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.
    CAIUS. By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's me! Qu'ai j'oublie?
    Dere is some simples in my closet dat I vill not for the
    varld I shall leave behind.
  QUICKLY. Ay me, he'll find the young man there, and be
    mad!
  CAIUS. O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villainy! larron!
    [Pulling SIMPLE out]  Rugby, my rapier!
  QUICKLY. Good master, be content.
  CAIUS. Wherefore shall I be content-a?
  QUICKLY. The young man is an honest man.
  CAIUS. What shall de honest man do in my closet? Dere is
    no honest man dat shall come in my closet.
  QUICKLY. I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic; hear the
    truth of it. He came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh.
  CAIUS. Vell?
  SIMPLE. Ay, forsooth, to desire her to-  
  QUICKLY. Peace, I pray you.
  CAIUS. Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.
  SIMPLE. To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, to
    speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page for my master,
    in the way of marriage.
  QUICKLY. This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put my finger
    in the fire, and need not.
  CAIUS. Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baillez me some paper.
    Tarry you a little-a-while.                        [Writes]
  QUICKLY.  [Aside to SIMPLE]  I am glad he is so quiet; if he
    had been throughly moved, you should have heard him
    so loud and so melancholy. But notwithstanding, man, I'll
    do you your master what good I can; and the very yea and
    the no is, the French doctor, my master-I may call him
    my master, look you, for I keep his house; and I wash,
    wring, brew, bake, scour, dress meat and drink, make the
    beds, and do all myself-
  SIMPLE.  [Aside to QUICKLY]  'Tis a great charge to come
    under one body's hand.
  QUICKLY.  [Aside to SIMPLE]  Are you avis'd o' that? You  
    shall find it a great charge; and to be up early and down
    late; but notwithstanding-to tell you in your ear, I would
    have no words of it-my master himself is in love with
    Mistress Anne Page; but notwithstanding that, I know
    Anne's mind-that's neither here nor there.
  CAIUS. You jack'nape; give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by gar,
    it is a shallenge; I will cut his troat in de park; and I will
    teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest to meddle or make. You
    may be gone; it is not good you tarry here. By gar, I will
    cut all his two stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone
    to throw at his dog.                             Exit SIMPLE
  QUICKLY. Alas, he speaks but for his friend.
  CAIUS. It is no matter-a ver dat. Do not you tell-a me dat I
    shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I vill kill de Jack
    priest; and I have appointed mine host of de Jarteer to
    measure our weapon. By gar, I will myself have Anne
    Page.
  QUICKLY. Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We
    must give folks leave to prate. What the good-year!
  CAIUS. Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have  
    not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door.
    Follow my heels, Rugby.               Exeunt CAIUS and RUGBY
  QUICKLY. You shall have-An fool's-head of your own. No,
    I know Anne's mind for that; never a woman in Windsor
    knows more of Anne's mind than I do; nor can do more
    than I do with her, I thank heaven.
  FENTON.  [Within]  Who's within there? ho!
  QUICKLY. Who's there, I trow? Come near the house, I pray
    you.

                          Enter FENTON

  FENTON. How now, good woman, how dost thou?
  QUICKLY. The better that it pleases your good worship to
    ask.
  FENTON. What news? How does pretty Mistress Anne?
  QUICKLY. In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and
    gentle; and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by
    the way; I praise heaven for it.
  FENTON. Shall I do any good, think'st thou? Shall I not lose  
    my suit?
  QUICKLY. Troth, sir, all is in His hands above; but
    notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn on a book
    she loves you. Have not your worship a wart above your eye?
  FENTON. Yes, marry, have I; what of that?
  QUICKLY. Well, thereby hangs a tale; good faith, it is such
    another Nan; but, I detest, an honest maid as ever broke
    bread. We had an hour's talk of that wart; I shall never
    laugh but in that maid's company! But, indeed, she is
    given too much to allicholy and musing; but for you-well,
    go to.
  FENTON. Well, I shall see her to-day. Hold, there's money
    for thee; let me have thy voice in my behalf. If thou seest
    her before me, commend me.
  QUICKLY. Will I? I' faith, that we will; and I will tell your
    worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence;
    and of other wooers.
  FENTON. Well, farewell; I am in great haste now.
  QUICKLY. Farewell to your worship.  [Exit FENTON]  Truly,
    an honest gentleman; but Anne loves him not; for I know  
    Anne's mind as well as another does. Out upon 't, what
    have I forgot?                                          Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE 1.

Before PAGE'S house

Enter MISTRESS PAGE, with a letter

  MRS. PAGE. What! have I scap'd love-letters in the holiday-time
    of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them? Let
    me see.                                              [Reads]
    'Ask me no reason why I love you; for though Love use
    Reason for his precisian, he admits him not for his counsellor.
    You are not young, no more am I; go to, then, there's
    sympathy. You are merry, so am I; ha! ha! then there's
    more sympathy. You love sack, and so do I; would you
    desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page
    at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice-that I love
    thee. I will not say, Pity me: 'tis not a soldier-like phrase;
    but I say, Love me. By me,
    Thine own true knight,
    By day or night,
    Or any kind of light,
    With all his might,  
    For thee to fight,
    JOHN FALSTAFF.'
    What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked, wicked world!
    One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with age to show
    himself a young gallant! What an unweighed behaviour
    hath this Flemish drunkard pick'd-with the devil's name!
    -out of my conversation, that he dares in this manner
    assay me? Why, he hath not been thrice in my company!
    What should I say to him? I was then frugal of my mirth.
    Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill in the parliament
    for the putting down of men. How shall I be
    reveng'd on him? for reveng'd I will be, as sure as his guts
    are made of puddings.

                       Enter MISTRESS FORD

  MRS. FORD. Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your
    house.
  MRS. PAGE. And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look
    very ill.  
  MRS. FORD. Nay, I'll ne'er believe that; I have to show to
    the contrary.
  MRS. PAGE. Faith, but you do, in my mind.
  MRS. FORD. Well, I do, then; yet, I say, I could show you to
    the contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel.
  MRS. PAGE. What's the matter, woman?
  MRS. FORD. O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect,
    I could come to such honour!
  MRS. PAGE. Hang the trifle, woman; take the honour. What
    is it? Dispense with trifles; what is it?
  MRS. FORD. If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment
    or so, I could be knighted.
  MRS. PAGE. What? Thou liest. Sir Alice Ford! These knights
    will hack; and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy
    gentry.
  MRS. FORD. We burn daylight. Here, read, read; perceive
    how I might be knighted. I shall think the worse of fat
    men as long as I have an eye to make difference of men's
    liking. And yet he would not swear; prais'd women's
    modesty, and gave such orderly and well-behaved reproof  
    to all uncomeliness that I would have sworn his disposition
    would have gone to the truth of his words; but they do no
    more adhere and keep place together than the Hundredth
    Psalm to the tune of 'Greensleeves.' What tempest, I trow,
    threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his belly,
    ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I
    think the best way were to entertain him with hope, till
    the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease.
    Did you ever hear the like?
  MRS. PAGE. Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
    Ford differs. To thy great comfort in this mystery of ill
    opinions, here's the twin-brother of thy letter; but let thine
    inherit first, for, I protest, mine never shall. I warrant he
    hath a thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
    different names-sure, more!-and these are of the second
    edition. He will print them, out of doubt; for he cares not
    what he puts into the press when he would put us two. I
    had rather be a giantess and lie under Mount Pelion. Well,
    I will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste
    man.  
  MRS. FORD. Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the
    very words. What doth he think of us?
  MRS. PAGE. Nay, I know not; it makes me almost ready to
    wrangle with mine own honesty. I'll entertain myself like
    one that I am not acquainted withal; for, sure, unless he
    know some strain in me that I know not myself, he would
    never have boarded me in this fury.
  MRS. FORD. 'Boarding' call you it? I'll be sure to keep him
    above deck.
  MRS. PAGE. So will I; if he come under my hatches, I'll never
    to sea again. Let's be reveng'd on him; let's appoint him a
    meeting, give him a show of comfort in his suit, and lead
    him on with a fine-baited delay, till he hath pawn'd his
    horses to mine host of the Garter.
  MRS. FORD. Nay, I will consent to act any villainy against
    him that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O
    that my husband saw this letter! It would give eternal food
    to his jealousy.
  MRS. PAGE. Why, look where he comes; and my good man
    too; he's as far from jealousy as I am from giving him  
    cause; and that, I hope, is an unmeasurable distance.
  MRS. FORD. You are the happier woman.
  MRS. PAGE. Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
    Come hither.                                   [They retire]

           Enter FORD with PISTOL, and PAGE with Nym

  FORD. Well, I hope it be not so.
  PISTOL. Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.
    Sir John affects thy wife.
  FORD. Why, sir, my wife is not young.
  PISTOL. He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,
    Both young and old, one with another, Ford;
    He loves the gallimaufry. Ford, perpend.
  FORD. Love my wife!
  PISTOL. With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,
    Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels.
    O, odious is the name!
  FORD. What name, sir?
  PISTOL. The horn, I say. Farewell.  
    Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night;
    Take heed, ere summer comes, or cuckoo birds do sing.
    Away, Sir Corporal Nym.
    Believe it, Page; he speaks sense.               Exit PISTOL
  FORD.  [Aside]  I will be patient; I will find out this.
  NYM.  [To PAGE]  And this is true; I like not the humour of
    lying. He hath wronged me in some humours; I should
    have borne the humour'd letter to her; but I have a sword,
    and it shall bite upon my necessity. He loves your wife;
    there's the short and the long.
    My name is Corporal Nym; I speak, and I avouch;
    'Tis true. My name is Nym, and Falstaff loves your wife.
    Adieu! I love not the humour of bread and cheese; and
    there's the humour of it. Adieu.                    Exit Nym
  PAGE. 'The humour of it,' quoth 'a! Here's a fellow frights
    English out of his wits.
  FORD. I will seek out Falstaff.
  PAGE. I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.
  FORD. If I do find it-well.
  PAGE. I will not believe such a Cataian though the priest o'  
    th' town commended him for a true man.
  FORD. 'Twas a good sensible fellow. Well.

             MISTRESS PAGE and MISTRESS FORD come forward

  PAGE. How now, Meg!
  MRS. PAGE. Whither go you, George? Hark you.
  MRS. FORD. How now, sweet Frank, why art thou melancholy?
  FORD. I melancholy! I am not melancholy. Get you home;
    go.
  MRS. FORD. Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head now.
    Will you go, Mistress Page?

                     Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY

  MRS. PAGE. Have with you. You'll come to dinner, George?
    [Aside to MRS. FORD]  Look who comes yonder; she shall
    be our messenger to this paltry knight.
  MRS. FORD.  [Aside to MRS. PAGE]  Trust me, I thought on
    her; she'll fit it.  
  MRS. PAGE. You are come to see my daughter Anne?
  QUICKLY. Ay, forsooth; and, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?
  MRS. PAGE. Go in with us and see; we have an hour's talk
    with you.           Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and
                                                MISTRESS QUICKLY
  PAGE. How now, Master Ford!
  FORD. You heard what this knave told me, did you not?
  PAGE. Yes; and you heard what the other told me?
  FORD. Do you think there is truth in them?
  PAGE. Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would offer it;
    but these that accuse him in his intent towards our
    wives are a yoke of his discarded men; very rogues, now
    they be out of service.
  FORD. Were they his men?
  PAGE. Marry, were they.
  FORD. I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at the
    Garter?
  PAGE. Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage
    toward my wife, I would turn her loose to him; and what
    he gets more of her than sharp words, let it lie on my head.  
  FORD. I do not misdoubt my wife; but I would be loath to
    turn them together. A man may be too confident. I would
    have nothing lie on my head. I cannot be thus satisfied.

                           Enter HOST

  PAGE. Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes.
    There is either liquor in his pate or money in his purse
    when he looks so merrily. How now, mine host!
  HOST. How now, bully rook! Thou'rt a gentleman.  [To
    SHALLOW following]  Cavaleiro Justice, I say.

                         Enter SHALLOW

  SHALLOW. I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and
    twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go with
    us? We have sport in hand.
  HOST. Tell him, Cavaleiro Justice; tell him, bully rook.
  SHALLOW. Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh
    the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.  
  FORD. Good mine host o' th' Garter, a word with you.
  HOST. What say'st thou, my bully rook?         [They go aside]
  SHALLOW.  [To PAGE] Will you go with us to behold it? My
    merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and,
    I think, hath appointed them contrary places; for, believe
    me, I hear the parson is no jester. Hark, I will tell you
    what our sport shall be.               [They converse apart]
  HOST. Hast thou no suit against my knight, my guest-cavaleiro.
  FORD. None, I protest; but I'll give you a pottle of burnt
    sack to give me recourse to him, and tell him my name is
    Brook-only for a jest.
  HOST. My hand, bully; thou shalt have egress and regress-
    said I well?-and thy name shall be Brook. It is a merry
    knight. Will you go, Mynheers?
  SHALLOW. Have with you, mine host.
  PAGE. I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in his
    rapier.
  SHALLOW. Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these
    times you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and
    I know not what. 'Tis the heart, Master Page; 'tis here,  
    'tis here. I have seen the time with my long sword I would
    have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.
  HOST. Here, boys, here, here! Shall we wag?
  PAGE. Have with you. I had rather hear them scold than
    fight.                                   Exeunt all but FORD
  FORD. Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on
    his wife's frailty, yet I cannot put off my opinion so
    easily. She was in his company at Page's house, and what
    they made there I know not. Well, I will look further into
    't, and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff. If I find her
    honest, I lose not my labour; if she be otherwise, 'tis labour
    well bestowed.                                          Exit




SCENE 2.

A room in the Garter Inn

Enter FALSTAFF and PISTOL

  FALSTAFF. I will not lend thee a penny.
  PISTOL. I will retort the sum in equipage.
  FALSTAFF. Not a penny.
  PISTOL. Why, then the world's mine oyster. Which I with
    sword will open.
  FALSTAFF. Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you should
    lay my countenance to pawn. I have grated upon my good
    friends for three reprieves for you and your coach-fellow,
    Nym; or else you had look'd through the grate, like a
    geminy of baboons. I am damn'd in hell for swearing to
    gentlemen my friends you were good soldiers and tall fellows;
    and when Mistress Bridget lost the handle of her fan,
    I took 't upon mine honour thou hadst it not.
  PISTOL. Didst not thou share? Hadst thou not fifteen pence?
  FALSTAFF. Reason, you rogue, reason. Think'st thou I'll
    endanger my soul gratis? At a word, hang no more about me,  
    I am no gibbet for you. Go-a short knife and a throng!-
    to your manor of Pickt-hatch; go. You'll not bear a letter
    for me, you rogue! You stand upon your honour! Why,
    thou unconfinable baseness, it is as much as I can do to
    keep the terms of my honour precise. I, I, I myself
    sometimes, leaving the fear of God on the left hand, and hiding
    mine honour in my necessity, am fain to shuffle, to hedge,
    and to lurch; and yet you, rogue, will ensconce your rags,
    your cat-a-mountain looks, your red-lattice phrases, and
    your bold-beating oaths, under the shelter of your honour!
    You will not do it, you!
  PISTOL. I do relent; what would thou more of man?

                          Enter ROBIN

  ROBIN. Sir, here's a woman would speak with you.
  FALSTAFF. Let her approach.

                     Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
  
  QUICKLY. Give your worship good morrow.
  FALSTAFF. Good morrow, good wife.
  QUICKLY. Not so, an't please your worship.
  FALSTAFF. Good maid, then.
  QUICKLY. I'll be sworn;
    As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
  FALSTAFF. I do believe the swearer. What with me?
  QUICKLY. Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?
  FALSTAFF. Two thousand, fair woman; and I'll vouchsafe
    thee the hearing.
  QUICKLY. There is one Mistress Ford, sir-I pray, come a little
    nearer this ways. I myself dwell with Master Doctor
    Caius.
  FALSTAFF. Well, on: Mistress Ford, you say-
  QUICKLY. Your worship says very true. I pray your worship
    come a little nearer this ways.
  FALSTAFF. I warrant thee nobody hears-mine own people,
    mine own people.
  QUICKLY. Are they so? God bless them, and make them his
    servants!  
  FALSTAFF. Well; Mistress Ford, what of her?
  QUICKLY. Why, sir, she's a good creature. Lord, Lord, your
    worship's a wanton! Well, heaven forgive you, and all of
    us, I pray.
  FALSTAFF. Mistress Ford; come, Mistress Ford-
  QUICKLY. Marry, this is the short and the long of it: you
    have brought her into such a canaries as 'tis wonderful.
    The best courtier of them all, when the court lay at Windsor,
    could never have brought her to such a canary. Yet
    there has been knights, and lords, and gentlemen, with
    their coaches; I warrant you, coach after coach, letter after
    letter, gift after gift; smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so
    rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold; and in such alligant
    terms; and in such wine and sugar of the best and the
    fairest, that would have won any woman's heart; and I
    warrant you, they could never get an eye-wink of her.
    I had myself twenty angels given me this morning; but I
    defy all angels, in any such sort, as they say, but in the
    way of honesty; and, I warrant you, they could never get
    her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all;  
    and yet there has been earls, nay, which is more,
    pensioners; but, I warrant you, all is one with her.
  FALSTAFF. But what says she to me? Be brief, my good she-
    Mercury.
  QUICKLY. Marry, she hath receiv'd your letter; for the
    which she thanks you a thousand times; and she gives you
    to notify that her husband will be absence from his house
    between ten and eleven.
  FALSTAFF. Ten and eleven?
  QUICKLY. Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see
    the picture, she says, that you wot of. Master Ford, her
    husband, will be from home. Alas, the sweet woman leads
    an ill life with him! He's a very jealousy man; she leads a
    very frampold life with him, good heart.
  FALSTAFF. Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to her; I
    will not fail her.
  QUICKLY. Why, you say well. But I have another messenger
    to your worship. Mistress Page hath her hearty commendations
    to you too; and let me tell you in your ear, she's as
    fartuous a civil modest wife, and one, I tell you, that will  
    not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in
    Windsor, whoe'er be the other; and she bade me tell your
    worship that her husband is seldom from home, but she
    hopes there will come a time. I never knew a woman so
    dote upon a man: surely I think you have charms, la! Yes,
    in truth.
  FALSTAFF. Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my
    good parts aside, I have no other charms.
  QUICKLY. Blessing on your heart for 't!
  FALSTAFF. But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford's wife and
    Page's wife acquainted each other how they love me?
  QUICKLY. That were a jest indeed! They have not so little
    grace, I hope-that were a trick indeed! But Mistress Page
    would desire you to send her your little page of all loves.
    Her husband has a marvellous infection to the little page;
    and truly Master Page is an honest man. Never a wife in
    Windsor leads a better life than she does; do what she will,
    say what she will, take all, pay all, go to bed when she
    list, rise when she list, all is as she will; and truly she
    deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she  
    is one. You must send her your page; no remedy.
  FALSTAFF. Why, I will.
  QUICKLY. Nay, but do so then; and, look you, he may come
    and go between you both; and in any case have a
    nay-word, that you may know one another's mind, and the boy
    never need to understand any thing; for 'tis not good that
    children should know any wickedness. Old folks, you
    know, have discretion, as they say, and know the world.
  FALSTAFF. Fare thee well; commend me to them both.
    There's my purse; I am yet thy debtor. Boy, go along with
    this woman.  [Exeunt QUICKLY and ROBIN]  This news
    distracts me.
  PISTOL.  [Aside]  This punk is one of Cupid's carriers;
    Clap on more sails; pursue; up with your fights;
    Give fire; she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!    Exit
  FALSTAFF. Say'st thou so, old Jack; go thy ways; I'll make
    more of thy old body than I have done. Will they yet look
    after thee? Wilt thou, after the expense of so much money,
    be now a gainer? Good body, I thank thee. Let them say
    'tis grossly done; so it be fairly done, no matter.  

                         Enter BARDOLPH

  BARDOLPH. Sir John, there's one Master Brook below would
    fain speak with you, and be acquainted with you; and hath
    sent your worship a moming's draught of sack.
  FALSTAFF. Brook is his name?
  BARDOLPH. Ay, sir.
  FALSTAFF. Call him in.  [Exit BARDOLPH]  Such Brooks are
    welcome to me, that o'erflows such liquor. Ah, ha! Mistress
    Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompass'd you? Go to;
    via!

              Re-enter BARDOLPH, with FORD disguised

  FORD. Bless you, sir!
  FALSTAFF. And you, sir! Would you speak with me?
  FORD. I make bold to press with so little preparation upon
    you.
  FALSTAFF. You're welcome. What's your will? Give us leave,  
    drawer.                                        Exit BARDOLPH
  FORD. Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much; my name
    is Brook.
  FALSTAFF. Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance
    of you.
  FORD. Good Sir John, I sue for yours-not to charge you; for I
    must let you understand I think myself in better plight for
    a lender than you are; the which hath something
    embold'ned me to this unseason'd intrusion; for they say, if
    money go before, all ways do lie open.
  FALSTAFF. Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.
  FORD. Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me; if
    you will help to bear it, Sir John, take all, or half, for easing
    me of the carriage.
  FALSTAFF. Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your
    porter.
  FORD. I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.
  FALSTAFF. Speak, good Master Brook; I shall be glad to be
    your servant.
  FORD. Sir, I hear you are a scholar-I will be brief with you  
    -and you have been a man long known to me, though I
    had never so good means as desire to make myself acquainted
    with you. I shall discover a thing to you, wherein
    I must very much lay open mine own imperfection; but,
    good Sir John, as you have one eye upon my follies, as you
    hear them unfolded, turn another into the register of your
    own, that I may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you
    yourself know how easy is it to be such an offender.
  FALSTAFF. Very well, sir; proceed.
  FORD. There is a gentlewoman in this town, her husband's
    name is Ford.
  FALSTAFF. Well, sir.
  FORD. I have long lov'd her, and, I protest to you, bestowed
    much on her; followed her with a doting observance;
    engross'd opportunities to meet her; fee'd every slight occasion
    that could but niggardly give me sight of her; not
    only bought many presents to give her, but have given
    largely to many to know what she would have given;
    briefly, I have pursu'd her as love hath pursued me; which
    hath been on the wing of all occasions. But whatsoever I  
    have merited, either in my mind or in my means, meed, I
    am sure, I have received none, unless experience be a jewel;
    that I have purchased at an infinite rate, and that hath
    taught me to say this:
    'Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues;
    Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.'
  FALSTAFF. Have you receiv'd no promise of satisfaction at
    her hands?
  FORD. Never.
  FALSTAFF. Have you importun'd her to such a purpose?
  FORD. Never.
    FALSTAFF. Of what quality was your love, then?
  FORD. Like a fair house built on another man's ground; so
    that I have lost my edifice by mistaking the place where
    erected it.
  FALSTAFF. To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?
  FORD. When I have told you that, I have told you all. Some
    say that though she appear honest to me, yet in other
    places she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd
    construction made of her. Now, Sir John, here is the heart  
    of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent
    breeding, admirable discourse, of great admittance, authentic in
    your place and person, generally allow'd for your many
    war-like, courtlike, and learned preparations.
  FALSTAFF. O, sir!
  FORD. Believe it, for you know it. There is money; spend it,
    spend it; spend more; spend all I have; only give me so
    much of your time in exchange of it as to lay an amiable
    siege to the honesty of this Ford's wife; use your art of
    wooing, win her to consent to you; if any man may, you
    may as soon as any.
    FALSTAFF. Would it apply well to the vehemency of your
    affection, that I should win what you would enjoy?
    Methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously.
  FORD. O, understand my drift. She dwells so securely on the
    excellency of her honour that the folly of my soul dares
    not present itself; she is too bright to be look'd against.
    Now, could I come to her with any detection in my hand,
    my desires had instance and argument to commend themselves;
    I could drive her then from the ward of her purity,  
    her reputation, her marriage vow, and a thousand other her
    defences, which now are too too strongly embattl'd against
    me. What say you to't, Sir John?
  FALSTAFF. Master Brook, I will first make bold with your
    money; next, give me your hand; and last, as I am a gentleman,
    you shall, if you will, enjoy Ford's wife.
  FORD. O good sir!
  FALSTAFF. I say you shall.
  FORD. Want no money, Sir John; you shall want none.
  FALSTAFF. Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you shall
    want none. I shall be with her, I may tell you, by her own
    appointment; even as you came in to me her assistant, or
    go-between, parted from me; I say I shall be with her between
    ten and eleven; for at that time the jealous rascally
    knave, her husband, will be forth. Come you to me at
    night; you shall know how I speed.
  FORD. I am blest in your acquaintance. Do you know Ford,
    Sir?
  FALSTAFF. Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know him
    not; yet I wrong him to call him poor; they say the  
    jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money; for the which
    his wife seems to me well-favour'd. I will use her as the
    key of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer; and there's my harvest-home.
  FORD. I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him
    if you saw him.
  FALSTAFF. Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I will
    stare him out of his wits; I will awe him with my cudgel;
    it shall hang like a meteor o'er the cuckold's horns. Master
    Brook, thou shalt know I will predominate over the
    peasant, and thou shalt lie with his wife. Come to me soon at
    night. Ford's a knave, and I will aggravate his style; thou,
    Master Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold.
    Come to me soon at night.                               Exit
  FORD. What a damn'd Epicurean rascal is this! My heart is
    ready to crack with impatience. Who says this is improvident
    jealousy? My wife hath sent to him; the hour is fix'd;
    the match is made. Would any man have thought this? See
    the hell of having a false woman! My bed shall be abus'd,
    my coffers ransack'd, my reputation gnawn at; and I shall
    not only receive this villainous wrong, but stand under the  
    adoption of abominable terms, and by him that does me
    this wrong. Terms! names! Amaimon sounds well; Lucifer,
    well; Barbason, well; yet they are devils' additions, the names
    of fiends. But cuckold! Wittol! Cuckold! the devil himself
    hath not such a name. Page is an ass, a secure ass; he will trust
    his wife; he will not be jealous; I will rather trust a Fleming
    with my butter, Parson Hugh the Welshman with my
    cheese, an Irishman with my aqua-vitae bottle, or a thief to
    walk my ambling gelding, than my wife with herself. Then
    she plots, then she ruminates, then she devises; and what
    they think in their hearts they may effect, they will break
    their hearts but they will effect. God be prais'd for my
    jealousy! Eleven o'clock the hour. I will prevent this, detect
    my wife, be reveng'd on Falstaff, and laugh at Page.
    I will about it; better three hours too soon than a minute
    too late. Fie, fie, fie! cuckold! cuckold! cuckold!     Exit




SCENE 3.

A field near Windsor

Enter CAIUS and RUGBY

  CAIUS. Jack Rugby!
  RUGBY. Sir?
  CAIUS. Vat is de clock, Jack?
  RUGBY. 'Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promis'd to
    meet.
  CAIUS. By gar, he has save his soul dat he is no come; he has
    pray his Pible well dat he is no come; by gar, Jack Rugby,
    he is dead already, if he be come.
  RUGBY. He is wise, sir; he knew your worship would kill
    him if he came.
  CAIUS. By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him. Take
    your rapier, Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
  RUGBY. Alas, sir, I cannot fence!
  CAIUS. Villainy, take your rapier.
  RUGBY. Forbear; here's company.
  
            Enter HOST, SHALLOW, SLENDER, and PAGE

  HOST. Bless thee, bully doctor!
  SHALLOW. Save you, Master Doctor Caius!
  PAGE. Now, good Master Doctor!
  SLENDER. Give you good morrow, sir.
  CAIUS. Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
  HOST. To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse;
    to see thee here, to see thee there; to see thee pass thy
    punto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy distance, thy montant.
    Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Francisco? Ha,
    bully! What says my Aesculapius? my Galen? my heart
    of elder? Ha! is he dead, bully stale? Is he dead?
  CAIUS. By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de world; he is
    not show his face.
  HOST. Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal. Hector of Greece,
    my boy!
  CAIUS. I pray you, bear witness that me have stay six or
    seven, two tree hours for him, and he is no come.
  SHALLOW. He is the wiser man, Master Doctor: he is a curer  
    of souls, and you a curer of bodies; if you should fight,
    you go against the hair of your professions. Is it not true,
    Master Page?
  PAGE. Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great fighter,
    though now a man of peace.
  SHALLOW. Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old, and
    of the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make
    one. Though we are justices, and doctors, and churchmen,
    Master Page, we have some salt of our youth in us; we are
    the sons of women, Master Page.
  PAGE. 'Tis true, Master Shallow.
  SHALLOW. It will be found so, Master Page. Master Doctor
  CAIUS, I come to fetch you home. I am sworn of the peace;
    you have show'd yourself a wise physician, and Sir Hugh
    hath shown himself a wise and patient churchman. You
    must go with me, Master Doctor.
  HOST. Pardon, Guest Justice. A word, Mounseur Mockwater.
  CAIUS. Mock-vater! Vat is dat?
  HOST. Mockwater, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.
  CAIUS. By gar, then I have as much mockvater as de Englishman.  
    Scurvy jack-dog priest! By gar, me vill cut his ears.
  HOST. He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.
  CAIUS. Clapper-de-claw! Vat is dat?
  HOST. That is, he will make thee amends.
  CAIUS. By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me; for,
    by gar, me vill have it.
  HOST. And I will provoke him to't, or let him wag.
  CAIUS. Me tank you for dat.
  HOST. And, moreover, bully-but first:  [Aside to the others]
    Master Guest, and Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender,
    go you through the town to Frogmore.
  PAGE.  [Aside]  Sir Hugh is there, is he?
  HOST.  [Aside]  He is there. See what humour he is in; and
    I will bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?
  SHALLOW.  [Aside]  We will do it.
  PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER. Adieu, good Master Doctor.
                               Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
  CAIUS. By gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak for a jack-
    an-ape to Anne Page.
  HOST. Let him die. Sheathe thy impatience; throw cold water  
    on thy choler; go about the fields with me through Frogmore;
    I will bring thee where Mistress Anne Page is, at a a
    farm-house, a-feasting; and thou shalt woo her. Cried
    game! Said I well?
  CAIUS. By gar, me dank you vor dat; by gar, I love you; and
    I shall procure-a you de good guest, de earl, de knight, de
    lords, de gentlemen, my patients.
  HOST. For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne
    Page. Said I well?
  CAIUS. By gar, 'tis good; vell said.
  HOST. Let us wag, then.
  CAIUS. Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.                    Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III SCENE 1.

A field near Frogmore

Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE

  EVANS. I pray you now, good Master Slender's serving-man,
    and friend Simple by your name, which way have you
    look'd for Master Caius, that calls himself Doctor of
    Physic?
  SIMPLE. Marry, sir, the pittie-ward, the park-ward; every
    way; old Windsor way, and every way but the town way.
  EVANS. I most fehemently desire you you will also look that
    way.
  SIMPLE. I will, Sir.                                      Exit
  EVANS. Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, and trempling
    of mind! I shall be glad if he have deceived me. How
    melancholies I am! I will knog his urinals about his knave's
    costard when I have goot opportunities for the ork. Pless
    my soul!                                             [Sings]
    To shallow rivers, to whose falls
    Melodious birds sings madrigals;  
    There will we make our peds of roses,
    And a thousand fragrant posies.
    To shallow-
    Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.     [Sings]
    Melodious birds sing madrigals-
    Whenas I sat in Pabylon-
    And a thousand vagram posies.
    To shallow, etc.

                       Re-enter SIMPLE

  SIMPLE. Yonder he is, coming this way, Sir Hugh.
  EVANS. He's welcome.                                   [Sings]
    To shallow rivers, to whose falls-
    Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
  SIMPLE. No weapons, sir. There comes my master, Master
    Shallow, and another gentleman, from Frogmore, over the
    stile, this way.
  EVANS. Pray you give me my gown; or else keep it in your
    arms.                                     [Takes out a book]  

               Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER

  SHALLOW. How now, Master Parson! Good morrow, good
    Sir Hugh. Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student
     from his book, and it is wonderful.
  SLENDER.  [Aside]  Ah, sweet Anne Page!
  PAGE. Save you, good Sir Hugh!
  EVANS. Pless you from his mercy sake, all of you!
  SHALLOW. What, the sword and the word! Do you study
    them both, Master Parson?
  PAGE. And youthful still, in your doublet and hose, this raw
    rheumatic day!
  EVANS. There is reasons and causes for it.
  PAGE. We are come to you to do a good office, Master
    Parson.
  EVANS. Fery well; what is it?
  PAGE. Yonder is a most reverend gentleman, who, belike having
    received wrong by some person, is at most odds with
    his own gravity and patience that ever you saw.  
  SHALLOW. I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never
    heard a man of his place, gravity, and learning, so wide of
    his own respect.
  EVANS. What is he?
  PAGE. I think you know him: Master Doctor Caius, the
    renowned French physician.
  EVANS. Got's will and his passion of my heart! I had as lief
    you would tell me of a mess of porridge.
  PAGE. Why?
  EVANS. He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and
    Galen, and he is a knave besides-a cowardly knave as you
    would desires to be acquainted withal.
  PAGE. I warrant you, he's the man should fight with him.
  SLENDER.  [Aside]  O sweet Anne Page!
  SHALLOW. It appears so, by his weapons. Keep them asunder;
    here comes Doctor Caius.

                 Enter HOST, CAIUS, and RUGBY

  PAGE. Nay, good Master Parson, keep in your weapon.  
  SHALLOW. So do you, good Master Doctor.
  HOST. Disarm them, and let them question; let them keep
    their limbs whole and hack our English.
  CAIUS. I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear.
    Verefore will you not meet-a me?
  EVANS.  [Aside to CAIUS]  Pray you use your patience; in
    good time.
  CAIUS. By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.
  EVANS.  [Aside to CAIUS]  Pray you, let us not be
    laughing-stocks to other men's humours; I desire you in
    friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends.
    [Aloud]  I will knog your urinals about your knave's cogscomb
    for missing your meetings and appointments.
  CAIUS. Diable! Jack Rugby-mine Host de Jarteer-have I
    not stay for him to kill him? Have I not, at de place I did
    appoint?
  EVANS. As I am a Christians soul, now, look you, this is the
    place appointed. I'll be judgment by mine host of the
    Garter.
  HOST. Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,  
    soul-curer and body-curer.
  CAIUS. Ay, dat is very good! excellent!
  HOST. Peace, I say. Hear mine host of the Garter. Am I
    politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel? Shall I lose my
    doctor? No; he gives me the potions and the motions. Shall I
    lose my parson, my priest, my Sir Hugh? No; he gives me
    the proverbs and the noverbs. Give me thy hand, terrestrial;
    so. Give me thy hand, celestial; so. Boys of art, I have
    deceiv'd you both; I have directed you to wrong places;
    your hearts are mighty, your skins are whole, and let burnt
    sack be the issue. Come, lay their swords to pawn. Follow
    me, lads of peace; follow, follow, follow.
  SHALLOW. Trust me, a mad host. Follow, gentlemen, follow.
  SLENDER.  [Aside]  O sweet Anne Page!
                                  Exeunt all but CAIUS and EVANS
  CAIUS. Ha, do I perceive dat? Have you make-a de sot of us,
    ha, ha?
  EVANS. This is well; he has made us his vlouting-stog. I
    desire you that we may be friends; and let us knog our prains
    together to be revenge on this same scall, scurvy, cogging  
    companion, the host of the Garter.
  CAIUS. By gar, with all my heart. He promise to bring me
    where is Anne Page; by gar, he deceive me too.
  EVANS. Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you follow.
                                                          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE 2.

The street in Windsor

Enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN

  MRS. PAGE. Nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were
    wont to be a follower, but now you are a leader. Whether
    had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your master's heels?
  ROBIN. I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man than
    follow him like a dwarf.
  MRS. PAGE. O, you are a flattering boy; now I see you'll be a
    courtier.

                          Enter FORD

  FORD. Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?
  MRS. PAGE. Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home?
  FORD. Ay; and as idle as she may hang together, for want of
    company. I think, if your husbands were dead, you two
    would marry.
  MRS. PAGE. Be sure of that-two other husbands.  
  FORD. Where had you this pretty weathercock?
  MRS. PAGE. I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my
    husband had him of. What do you call your knight's
    name, sirrah?
  ROBIN. Sir John Falstaff.
  FORD. Sir John Falstaff!
  MRS. PAGE. He, he; I can never hit on's name. There is such
    a league between my good man and he! Is your wife at
    home indeed?
  FORD. Indeed she is.
  MRS. PAGE. By your leave, sir. I am sick till I see her.
                                      Exeunt MRS. PAGE and ROBIN
  FORD. Has Page any brains? Hath he any eyes? Hath he any
    thinking? Sure, they sleep; he hath no use of them. Why,
    this boy will carry a letter twenty mile as easy as a cannon
    will shoot pointblank twelve score. He pieces out his wife's
    inclination; he gives her folly motion and advantage; and
    now she's going to my wife, and Falstaff's boy with her. A
    man may hear this show'r sing in the wind. And Falstaff's
    boy with her! Good plots! They are laid; and our revolted  
    wives share damnation together. Well; I will take him,
    then torture my wife, pluck the borrowed veil of modesty
    from the so seeming Mistress Page, divulge Page himself
    for a secure and wilful Actaeon; and to these violent proceedings
    all my neighbours shall cry aim.  [Clock strikes]
    The clock gives me my cue, and my assurance bids me
    search; there I shall find Falstaff. I shall be rather prais'd
    for this than mock'd; for it is as positive as the earth is firm
    that Falstaff is there. I will go.

     Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, SLENDER, HOST, SIR HUGH EVANS,
                              CAIUS, and RUGBY

  SHALLOW, PAGE, &C. Well met, Master Ford.
  FORD. Trust me, a good knot; I have good cheer at home,
    and I pray you all go with me.
  SHALLOW. I must excuse myself, Master Ford.
  SLENDER. And so must I, sir; we have appointed to dine with
    Mistress Anne, and I would not break with her for more
    money than I'll speak of.  
  SHALLOW. We have linger'd about a match between Anne
    Page and my cousin Slender, and this day we shall have
    our answer.
  SLENDER. I hope I have your good will, father Page.
  PAGE. You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly for you. But
    my wife, Master Doctor, is for you altogether.
  CAIUS. Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me; my nursh-a
    Quickly tell me so mush.
  HOST. What say you to young Master Fenton? He capers,
    he dances, he has eyes of youth, he writes verses, he speaks
    holiday, he smells April and May; he will carry 't, he will
    carry 't; 'tis in his buttons; he will carry 't.
  PAGE. Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is
    of no having: he kept company with the wild Prince and
    Poins; he is of too high a region, he knows too much. No,
    he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of
    my substance; if he take her, let him take her simply; the
    wealth I have waits on my consent, and my consent goes
    not that way.
  FORD. I beseech you, heartily, some of you go home with me  
    to dinner: besides your cheer, you shall have sport; I will
    show you a monster. Master Doctor, you shall go; so shall
    you, Master Page; and you, Sir Hugh.
  SHALLOW. Well, fare you well; we shall have the freer
    wooing at Master Page's.          Exeunt SHALLOW and SLENDER
  CAIUS. Go home, John Rugby; I come anon.            Exit RUGBY
  HOST. Farewell, my hearts; I will to my honest knight
    Falstaff, and drink canary with him.               Exit HOST
  FORD.  [Aside]  I think I shall drink in pipe-wine first with
    him. I'll make him dance. Will you go, gentles?
  ALL. Have with you to see this monster.                 Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE 3.

FORD'S house

Enter MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE

  MRS. FORD. What, John! what, Robert!
  MRS. PAGE. Quickly, quickly! Is the buck-basket-
  MRS. FORD. I warrant. What, Robin, I say!

                 Enter SERVANTS with a basket

  MRS. PAGE. Come, come, come.
  MRS. FORD. Here, set it down.
  MRS. PAGE. Give your men the charge; we must be brief.
  MRS. FORD. Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be
    ready here hard by in the brew-house; and when I suddenly
    call you, come forth, and, without any pause or
    staggering, take this basket on your shoulders. That done,
    trudge with it in all haste, and carry it among the whitsters
    in Datchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch
    close by the Thames side.  
  Mrs. PAGE. You will do it?
  MRS. FORD. I ha' told them over and over; they lack no
    direction. Be gone, and come when you are call'd.
                                               Exeunt SERVANTS
  MRS. PAGE. Here comes little Robin.

                         Enter ROBIN

  MRS. FORD. How now, my eyas-musket, what news with
    you?
  ROBIN. My Master Sir John is come in at your back-door,
    Mistress Ford, and requests your company.
  MRS. PAGE. You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?
  ROBIN. Ay, I'll be sworn. My master knows not of your
    being here, and hath threat'ned to put me into everlasting
    liberty, if I tell you of it; for he swears he'll turn me away.
  MRS. PAGE. Thou 'rt a good boy; this secrecy of thine shall
    be a tailor to thee, and shall make thee a new doublet and
    hose. I'll go hide me.
  MRS. FORD. Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone.  [Exit  
  ROBIN]  Mistress Page, remember you your cue.
  MRS. PAGE. I warrant thee; if I do not act it, hiss me.
                                                Exit MRS. PAGE
  MRS. FORD. Go to, then; we'll use this unwholesome
    humidity, this gross wat'ry pumpion; we'll teach him to
    know turtles from jays.

                      Enter FALSTAFF

  FALSTAFF. Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel?
    Why, now let me die, for I have liv'd long enough; this is
    the period of my ambition. O this blessed hour!
  MRS. FORD. O sweet Sir John!
  FALSTAFF. Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate,
    Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish; I would thy
    husband were dead; I'll speak it before the best lord, I
    would make thee my lady.
  MRS. FORD. I your lady, Sir John? Alas, I should be a pitiful
    lady.
  FALSTAFF. Let the court of France show me such another. I  
    see how thine eye would emulate the diamond; thou hast
    the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the
    ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of Venetian admittance.
  MRS. FORD. A plain kerchief, Sir John; my brows become
    nothing else, nor that well neither.
  FALSTAFF. By the Lord, thou art a tyrant to say so; thou
    wouldst make an absolute courtier, and the firm fixture of
    thy foot would give an excellent motion to thy gait in a
    semi-circled farthingale. I see what thou wert, if Fortune
    thy foe were, not Nature, thy friend. Come, thou canst not
    hide it.
  MRS. FORD. Believe me, there's no such thing in me.
  FALSTAFF. What made me love thee? Let that persuade thee
    there's something extra-ordinary in thee. Come, I cannot
    cog, and say thou art this and that, like a many of these
    lisping hawthorn-buds that come like women in men's
    apparel, and smell like Bucklersbury in simple time; I
    cannot; but I love thee, none but thee; and thou deserv'st it.
  MRS. FORD. Do not betray me, sir; I fear you love Mistress
    Page.  
  FALSTAFF. Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the
    Counter-gate, which is as hateful to me as the reek of a
    lime-kiln.
  MRS. FORD. Well, heaven knows how I love you; and you
    shall one day find it.
  FALSTAFF. Keep in that mind; I'll deserve it.
  MRS. FORD. Nay, I must tell you, so you do; or else I could
    not be in that mind.
  ROBIN.  [Within]  Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford! here's
    Mistress Page at the door, sweating and blowing and looking
    wildly, and would needs speak with you presently.
  FALSTAFF. She shall not see me; I will ensconce me behind
    the arras.
  MRS. FORD. Pray you, do so; she's a very tattling woman.
                                      [FALSTAFF hides himself]

               Re-enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN

    What's the matter? How now!
  MRS. PAGE. O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You're  
    sham'd, y'are overthrown, y'are undone for ever.
  MRS. FORD. What's the matter, good Mistress Page?
  MRS. PAGE. O well-a-day, Mistress Ford, having an honest
    man to your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion!
  MRS. FORD. What cause of suspicion?
  MRS. PAGE. What cause of suspicion? Out upon you, how
    am I mistook in you!
  MRS. FORD. Why, alas, what's the matter?
  MRS. PAGE. Your husband's coming hither, woman, with all
    the officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman that he
    says is here now in the house, by your consent, to take an
    ill advantage of his absence. You are undone.
  MRS. FORD. 'Tis not so, I hope.
  MRS. PAGE. Pray heaven it be not so that you have such a
    man here; but 'tis most certain your husband's coming,
    with half Windsor at his heels, to search for such a one. I
    come before to tell you. If you know yourself clear, why,
    I am glad of it; but if you have a friend here, convey,
    convey him out. Be not amaz'd; call all your senses to you;
    defend your reputation, or bid farewell to your good life  
    for ever.
  MRS. FORD. What shall I do? There is a gentleman, my dear
    friend; and I fear not mine own shame as much as his peril.
    I had rather than a thousand pound he were out of the
    house.
  MRS. PAGE. For shame, never stand 'you had rather' and 'you
    had rather'! Your husband's here at hand; bethink you of
    some conveyance; in the house you cannot hide him. O,
    how have you deceiv'd me! Look, here is a basket; if he be
    of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here; and throw
    foul linen upon him, as if it were going to bucking, or-it is
    whiting-time-send him by your two men to Datchet
    Mead.
  MRS. FORD. He's too big to go in there. What shall I do?
  FALSTAFF.  [Coming forward]  Let me see 't, let me see 't. O,
    let me see 't! I'll in, I'll in; follow your friend's counsel;
    I'll in.
  MRS. PAGE. What, Sir John Falstaff!      [Aside to FALSTAFF]
    Are these your letters, knight?
  FALSTAFF.  [Aside to MRS. PAGE]  I love thee and none but  
    thee; help me away.-Let me creep in here; I'll never-
    [Gets into the basket; they cover him with foul linen]
  MRS. PAGE. Help to cover your master, boy. Call your men,
    Mistress Ford. You dissembling knight!
  MRS. FORD. What, John! Robert! John!                Exit ROBIN

                 Re-enter SERVANTS

    Go, take up these clothes here, quickly; where's the
    cowl-staff? Look how you drumble. Carry them to the laundress
    in Datchet Mead; quickly, come.

         Enter FORD, PAGE, CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS

  FORD. Pray you come near. If I suspect without cause, why
    then make sport at me, then let me be your jest; I deserve
    it. How now, whither bear you this?
  SERVANT. To the laundress, forsooth.
  MRS. FORD. Why, what have you to do whither they bear it?
    You were best meddle with buck-washing.  
  FORD. Buck? I would I could wash myself of the buck!
    Buck, buck, buck! ay, buck! I warrant you, buck; and of
    the season too, it shall appear.  [Exeunt SERVANTS with
    basket]  Gentlemen, I have dream'd to-night; I'll tell you my
    dream. Here, here, here be my keys; ascend my chambers,
    search, seek, find out. I'll warrant we'll unkennel the fox.
    Let me stop this way first.  [Locking the door]  So, now
    uncape.
  PAGE. Good Master Ford, be contented; you wrong yourself
    too much.
  FORD. True, Master Page. Up, gentlemen, you shall see sport
    anon; follow me, gentlemen.                             Exit
  EVANS. This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.
  CAIUS. By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France; it is not jealous
    in France.
  PAGE. Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his
    search.                        Exeunt EVANS, PAGE, and CAIUS
  MRS. PAGE. Is there not a double excellency in this?
  MRS. FORD. I know not which pleases me better, that my
    husband is deceived, or Sir John.  
  MRS. PAGE. What a taking was he in when your husband
    ask'd who was in the basket!
  MRS. FORD. I am half afraid he will have need of washing; so
    throwing him into the water will do him a benefit.
  MRS. PAGE. Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the
    same strain were in the same distress.
  MRS. FORD. I think my husband hath some special suspicion
    of Falstaff's being here, for I never saw him so gross in his
    jealousy till now.
  MRS. PAGE. I Will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have
    more tricks with Falstaff. His dissolute disease will scarce
    obey this medicine.
  MRS. FORD. Shall we send that foolish carrion, Mistress
    Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing into the water,
    and give him another hope, to betray him to another
    punishment?
  MRS. PAGE. We will do it; let him be sent for to-morrow
    eight o'clock, to have amends.

       Re-enter FORD, PAGE, CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS  

  FORD. I cannot find him; may be the knave bragg'd of that
    he could not compass.
  MRS. PAGE.  [Aside to MRS. FORD]  Heard you that?
  MRS. FORD. You use me well, Master Ford, do you?
  FORD. Ay, I do so.
  MRS. FORD. Heaven make you better than your thoughts!
  FORD. Amen.
  MRS. PAGE. You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.
  FORD. Ay, ay; I must bear it.
  EVANS. If there be any pody in the house, and in the
    chambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses, heaven forgive
    my sins at the day of judgment!
  CAIUS. Be gar, nor I too; there is no bodies.
  PAGE. Fie, fie, Master Ford, are you not asham'd? What
    spirit, what devil suggests this imagination? I would not ha'
    your distemper in this kind for the wealth of Windsor
    Castle.
  FORD. 'Tis my fault, Master Page; I suffer for it.
  EVANS. You suffer for a pad conscience. Your wife is as  
    honest a omans as I will desires among five thousand, and five
    hundred too.
  CAIUS. By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman.
  FORD. Well, I promis'd you a dinner. Come, come, walk in
    the Park. I pray you pardon me; I will hereafter make
    known to you why I have done this. Come, wife, come,
    Mistress Page; I pray you pardon me; pray heartly,
    pardon me.
  PAGE. Let's go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, we'll mock him.
    I do invite you to-morrow morning to my house to breakfast;
    after, we'll a-birding together; I have a fine hawk for
    the bush. Shall it be so?
  FORD. Any thing.
  EVANS. If there is one, I shall make two in the company.
  CAIUS. If there be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.
  FORD. Pray you go, Master Page.
  EVANS. I pray you now, remembrance to-morrow on the
    lousy knave, mine host.
  CAIUS. Dat is good; by gar, with all my heart.
  EVANS. A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!  
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 4.

Before PAGE'S house

Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE

  FENTON. I see I cannot get thy father's love;
    Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.
  ANNE. Alas, how then?
  FENTON. Why, thou must be thyself.
    He doth object I am too great of birth;
    And that, my state being gall'd with my expense,
    I seek to heal it only by his wealth.
    Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
    My riots past, my wild societies;
    And tells me 'tis a thing impossible
    I should love thee but as a property.
  ANNE.. May be he tells you true.
  FENTON. No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
    Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
    Was the first motive that I woo'd thee, Anne;
    Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value  
    Than stamps in gold, or sums in sealed bags;
    And 'tis the very riches of thyself
    That now I aim at.
  ANNE. Gentle Master Fenton,
    Yet seek my father's love; still seek it, sir.
    If opportunity and humblest suit
    Cannot attain it, why then-hark you hither.
                                           [They converse apart]

        Enter SHALLOW, SLENDER, and MISTRESS QUICKLY

  SHALLOW. Break their talk, Mistress Quickly; my kinsman
    shall speak for himself.
  SLENDER. I'll make a shaft or a bolt on 't; 'slid, 'tis but
    venturing.
  SHALLOW. Be not dismay'd.
  SLENDER. No, she shall not dismay me. I care not for that,
    but that I am afeard.
  QUICKLY. Hark ye, Master Slender would speak a word
    with you.  
  ANNE. I come to him.  [Aside]  This is my father's choice.
    O, what a world of vile ill-favour'd faults
    Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year!
  QUICKLY. And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a
    word with you.
  SHALLOW. She's coming; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a
    father!
  SLENDER. I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell
    you good jests of him. Pray you, uncle, tell Mistress Anne
    the jest how my father stole two geese out of a pen, good
    uncle.
  SHALLOW. Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.
  SLENDER. Ay, that I do; as well as I love any woman in
    Gloucestershire.
  SHALLOW. He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
  SLENDER. Ay, that I will come cut and longtail, under the
    degree of a squire.
  SHALLOW. He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds
    jointure.
  ANNE. Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.  
  SHALLOW. Marry, I thank you for it; I thank you for that
    good comfort. She calls you, coz; I'll leave you.
  ANNE. Now, Master Slender-
  SLENDER. Now, good Mistress Anne-
  ANNE. What is your will?
  SLENDER. My Will! 'Od's heartlings, that's a pretty jest
    indeed! I ne'er made my will yet, I thank heaven; I am not
    such a sickly creature, I give heaven praise.
  ANNE. I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?
  SLENDER. Truly, for mine own part I would little or nothing
    with you. Your father and my uncle hath made motions;
    if it be my luck, so; if not, happy man be his dole! They
    can tell you how things go better than I can. You may ask
    your father; here he comes.

            Enter PAGE and MISTRESS PAGE

  PAGE. Now, Master Slender! Love him, daughter Anne-
    Why, how now, what does Master Fenton here?
    You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.  
    I told you, sir, my daughter is dispos'd of.
  FENTON. Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.
  MRS. PAGE. Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.
  PAGE. She is no match for you.
  FENTON. Sir, will you hear me?
  PAGE. No, good Master Fenton.
    Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender; in.
    Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
                               Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
  QUICKLY. Speak to Mistress Page.
  FENTON. Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
    In such a righteous fashion as I do,
    Perforce, against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
    I must advance the colours of my love,
    And not retire. Let me have your good will.
  ANNE. Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
  MRS. PAGE. I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.
  QUICKLY. That's my master, Master Doctor.
  ANNE. Alas, I had rather be set quick i' th' earth.
    And bowl'd to death with turnips.  
  MRS. PAGE. Come, trouble not yourself. Good Master
    Fenton,
    I will not be your friend, nor enemy;
    My daughter will I question how she loves you,
    And as I find her, so am I affected;
    Till then, farewell, sir; she must needs go in;
    Her father will be angry.
  FENTON. Farewell, gentle mistress; farewell, Nan.
                                       Exeunt MRS. PAGE and ANNE
  QUICKLY. This is my doing now: 'Nay,' said I 'will you cast
    away your child on a fool, and a physician? Look on
    Master Fenton.' This is my doing.
  FENTON. I thank thee; and I pray thee, once to-night
    Give my sweet Nan this ring. There's for thy pains.
  QUICKLY. Now Heaven send thee good fortune!  [Exit
    FENTON]  A kind heart he hath; a woman would run through
    fire and water for such a kind heart. But yet I would my
    master had Mistress Anne; or I would Master Slender had
    her; or, in sooth, I would Master Fenton had her; I will
    do what I can for them all three, for so I have promis'd,  
    and I'll be as good as my word; but speciously for Master
    Fenton. Well, I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff
    from my two mistresses. What a beast am I to slack it!
 Exit




SCENE 5.

The Garter Inn

Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH

  FALSTAFF. Bardolph, I say!
  BARDOLPH. Here, sir.
  FALSTAFF. Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in 't.
                                                   Exit BARDOLPH
    Have I liv'd to be carried in a basket, like a barrow of
    butcher's offal, and to be thrown in the Thames? Well, if
    I be serv'd such another trick, I'll have my brains ta'en out
    and butter'd, and give them to a dog for a new-year's gift.
    The rogues slighted me into the river with as little remorse
    as they would have drown'd a blind bitch's puppies, fifteen
    i' th' litter; and you may know by my size that I have
    a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom were as deep as
    hell I should down. I had been drown'd but that the shore
    was shelvy and shallow-a death that I abhor; for the water
    swells a man; and what a thing should I have been when
    had been swell'd! I should have been a mountain of  
    mummy.

                  Re-enter BARDOLPH, with sack

  BARDOLPH. Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you
  FALSTAFF. Come, let me pour in some sack to the Thames
    water; for my belly's as cold as if I had swallow'd
    snowballs for pills to cool the reins. Call her in.
  BARDOLPH. Come in, woman.

                     Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY

  QUICKLY. By your leave; I cry you mercy. Give your
    worship good morrow.
  FALSTAFF. Take away these chalices. Go, brew me a pottle
    of sack finely.
  BARDOLPH. With eggs, sir?
  FALSTAFF. Simple of itself; I'll no pullet-sperm in my
    brewage.  [Exit BARDOLPH]  How now!
  QUICKLY. Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress  
    Ford.
  FALSTAFF. Mistress Ford! I have had ford enough; I was
    thrown into the ford; I have my belly full of ford.
  QUICKLY. Alas the day, good heart, that was not her fault!
    She does so take on with her men; they mistook their
    erection.
  FALSTAFF. So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman's
    promise.
  QUICKLY. Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn
    your heart to see it. Her husband goes this morning
    a-birding; she desires you once more to come to her between
    eight and nine; I must carry her word quickly. She'll make
    you amends, I warrant you.
  FALSTAFF. Well, I Will visit her. Tell her so; and bid her
    think what a man is. Let her consider his frailty, and then
    judge of my merit.
  QUICKLY. I will tell her.
  FALSTAFF. Do so. Between nine and ten, say'st thou?
  QUICKLY. Eight and nine, sir.
  FALSTAFF. Well, be gone; I will not miss her.  
  QUICKLY. Peace be with you, sir.                          Exit
  FALSTAFF. I marvel I hear not of Master Brook; he sent me
    word to stay within. I like his money well. O, here he
    comes.

                       Enter FORD disguised

  FORD. Bless you, sir!
  FALSTAFF. Now, Master Brook, you come to know what
    hath pass'd between me and Ford's wife?
  FORD. That, indeed, Sir John, is my business.
  FALSTAFF. Master Brook, I will not lie to you; I was at her
    house the hour she appointed me.
  FORD. And sped you, sir?
  FALSTAFF. Very ill-favouredly, Master Brook.
  FORD. How so, sir; did she change her determination?
  FALSTAFF. No. Master Brook; but the peaking cornuto her
    husband, Master Brook, dwelling in a continual 'larum of
    jealousy, comes me in the instant of our, encounter, after
    we had embrac'd, kiss'd, protested, and, as it were, spoke  
    the prologue of our comedy; and at his heels a rabble of his
    companions, thither provoked and instigated by his
    distemper, and, forsooth, to search his house for his wife's
    love.
  FORD. What, while you were there?
  FALSTAFF. While I was there.
  FORD. And did he search for you, and could not find you?
  FALSTAFF. You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes
    in one Mistress Page, gives intelligence of Ford's approach;
    and, in her invention and Ford's wife's distraction, they
    convey'd me into a buck-basket.
  FORD. A buck-basket!
  FALSTAFF. By the Lord, a buck-basket! Ramm'd me in with
    foul shirts and smocks, socks, foul stockings, greasy
    napkins, that, Master Brook, there was the rankest compound
    of villainous smell that ever offended nostril.
  FORD. And how long lay you there?
  FALSTAFF. Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have
    suffer'd to bring this woman to evil for your good. Being
    thus cramm'd in the basket, a couple of Ford's knaves, his  
    hinds, were call'd forth by their mistress to carry me in
    the name of foul clothes to Datchet Lane; they took me on
    their shoulders; met the jealous knave their master in the
    door; who ask'd them once or twice what they had in their
    basket. I quak'd for fear lest the lunatic knave would have
    search'd it; but Fate, ordaining he should be a cuckold,
    held his hand. Well, on went he for a search, and away
    went I for foul clothes. But mark the sequel, Master
    Brook-I suffered the pangs of three several deaths: first,
    an intolerable fright to be detected with a jealous rotten
    bell-wether; next, to be compass'd like a good bilbo in the
    circumference of a peck, hilt to point, heel to head; and
    then, to be stopp'd in, like a strong distillation, with
    stinking clothes that fretted in their own grease. Think of that
    -a man of my kidney. Think of that-that am as subject to
    heat as butter; a man of continual dissolution and thaw. It
    was a miracle to scape suffocation. And in the height of
    this bath, when I was more than half-stew'd in grease, like
    a Dutch dish, to be thrown into the Thames, and cool'd,
    glowing hot, in that surge, like a horse-shoe; think of that  
    -hissing hot. Think of that, Master Brook.
  FORD. In good sadness, sir, I am sorry that for my sake you
    have suffer'd all this. My suit, then, is desperate;
    you'll undertake her no more.
  FALSTAFF. Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I
    have been into Thames, ere I will leave her thus. Her
    husband is this morning gone a-birding; I have received from
    her another embassy of meeting; 'twixt eight and nine is
    the hour, Master Brook.
  FORD. 'Tis past eight already, sir.
  FALSTAFF. Is it? I Will then address me to my appointment.
    Come to me at your convenient leisure, and you shall
    know how I speed; and the conclusion shall be crowned
    with your enjoying her. Adieu. You shall have her, Master
    Brook; Master Brook, you shall cuckold Ford.            Exit
  FORD. Hum! ha! Is this a vision? Is this a dream? Do I sleep?
    Master Ford, awake; awake, Master Ford. There's a hole
    made in your best coat, Master Ford. This 'tis to be
    married; this 'tis to have linen and buck-baskets! Well, I will
    proclaim myself what I am; I will now take the lecher; he  
    is at my house. He cannot scape me; 'tis impossible he
    should; he cannot creep into a halfpenny purse nor into
    a pepper box. But, lest the devil that guides him should aid
    him, I will search impossible places. Though what I am I
    cannot avoid, yet to be what I would not shall not make
    me tame. If I have horns to make one mad, let the proverb
    go with me-I'll be horn mad.                            Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.

Windsor. A street

Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS QUICKLY, and WILLIAM

  MRS. PAGE. Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st thou?
  QUICKLY. Sure he is by this; or will be presently; but truly
    he is very courageous mad about his throwing into the
    water. Mistress Ford desires you to come suddenly.
  MRS. PAGE. I'll be with her by and by; I'll but bring my
    young man here to school. Look where his master comes;
    'tis a playing day, I see.

                     Enter SIR HUGH EVANS

    How now, Sir Hugh, no school to-day?
  EVANS. No; Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.
  QUICKLY. Blessing of his heart!
  MRS. PAGE. Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits
    nothing in the world at his book; I pray you ask him some
    questions in his accidence.  
  EVANS. Come hither, William; hold up your head; come.
  MRS. PAGE. Come on, sirrah; hold up your head; answer your
    master; be not afraid.
  EVANS. William, how many numbers is in nouns?
  WILLIAM. Two.
  QUICKLY. Truly, I thought there had been one number
    more, because they say 'Od's nouns.'
  EVANS. Peace your tattlings. What is 'fair,' William?
  WILLIAM. Pulcher.
  QUICKLY. Polecats! There are fairer things than polecats,
    sure.
  EVANS. You are a very simplicity oman; I pray you, peace.
    What is 'lapis,' William?
  WILLIAM. A stone.
  EVANS. And what is 'a stone,' William?
  WILLIAM. A pebble.
  EVANS. No, it is 'lapis'; I pray you remember in your prain.
  WILLIAM. Lapis.
  EVANS. That is a good William. What is he, William, that
    does lend articles?  
  WILLIAM. Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be
    thus declined: Singulariter, nominativo; hic, haec, hoc.
  EVANS. Nominativo, hig, hag, hog; pray you, mark: genitivo,
    hujus. Well, what is your accusative case?
  WILLIAM. Accusativo, hinc.
  EVANS. I pray you, have your remembrance, child.
    Accusativo, hung, hang, hog.
  QUICKLY. 'Hang-hog' is Latin for bacon, I warrant you.
  EVANS. Leave your prabbles, oman. What is the focative
    case, William?
  WILLIAM. O-vocativo, O.
  EVANS. Remember, William: focative is caret.
  QUICKLY. And that's a good root.
  EVANS. Oman, forbear.
  MRS. PAGE. Peace.
  EVANS. What is your genitive case plural, William?
  WILLIAM. Genitive case?
  EVANS. Ay.
  WILLIAM. Genitive: horum, harum, horum.
  QUICKLY. Vengeance of Jenny's case; fie on her! Never  
    name her, child, if she be a whore.
  EVANS. For shame, oman.
  QUICKLY. YOU do ill to teach the child such words. He
    teaches him to hick and to hack, which they'll do fast
    enough of themselves; and to call 'horum'; fie upon you!
  EVANS. Oman, art thou lunatics? Hast thou no understandings
    for thy cases, and the numbers of the genders? Thou
    art as foolish Christian creatures as I would desires.
  MRS. PAGE. Prithee hold thy peace.
  EVANS. Show me now, William, some declensions of your
    pronouns.
  WILLIAM. Forsooth, I have forgot.
  EVANS. It is qui, quae, quod; if you forget your qui's, your
    quae's, and your quod's, you must be preeches. Go your
    ways and play; go.
  MRS. PAGE. He is a better scholar than I thought he was.
  EVANS. He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.
  MRS. PAGE. Adieu, good Sir Hugh.                 Exit SIR HUGH
    Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.            Exeunt




SCENE 2.

FORD'S house

Enter FALSTAFF and MISTRESS FORD

  FALSTAFF. Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my
    sufferance. I see you are obsequious in your love, and I
    profess requital to a hair's breadth; not only, Mistress Ford, in
    the simple office of love, but in all the accoutrement,
    complement, and ceremony of it. But are you sure of your
    husband now?
  MRS. FORD. He's a-birding, sweet Sir John.
  MRS. PAGE.  [Within]  What hoa, gossip Ford, what hoa!
  MRS. FORD. Step into th' chamber, Sir John.      Exit FALSTAFF

                      Enter MISTRESS PAGE

  MRS. PAGE. How now, sweetheart, who's at home besides
    yourself?
  MRS. FORD. Why, none but mine own people.
  MRS. PAGE. Indeed?  
  MRS. FORD. No, certainly.  [Aside to her]  Speak louder.
  MRS. PAGE. Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.
  MRS. FORD. Why?
  MRS. PAGE. Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes
    again. He so takes on yonder with my husband; so rails
    against all married mankind; so curses an Eve's daughters,
    of what complexion soever; and so buffets himself on the
    forehead, crying 'Peer-out, peer-out!' that any madness I
    ever yet beheld seem'd but tameness, civility, and patience,
    to this his distemper he is in now. I am glad the fat knight
    is not here.
  MRS. FORD. Why, does he talk of him?
  MRS. PAGE. Of none but him; and swears he was carried out,
    the last time he search'd for him, in a basket; protests to
    my husband he is now here; and hath drawn him and the
    rest of their company from their sport, to make another
    experiment of his suspicion. But I am glad the knight is not
    here; now he shall see his own foolery.
  MRS. FORD. How near is he, Mistress Page?
  MRS. PAGE. Hard by, at street end; he will be here anon.  
  MRS. FORD. I am undone: the knight is here.
  MRS. PAGE. Why, then, you are utterly sham'd, and he's but
    a dead man. What a woman are you! Away with him,
    away with him; better shame than murder.
  MRS. FORD. Which way should he go? How should I bestow
    him? Shall I put him into the basket again?

                  Re-enter FALSTAFF

  FALSTAFF. No, I'll come no more i' th' basket. May I not go
    out ere he come?
  MRS. PAGE. Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers watch the
    door with pistols, that none shall issue out; otherwise you
    might slip away ere he came. But what make you here?
  FALSTAFF. What shall I do? I'll creep up into the chimney.
  MRS. FORD. There they always use to discharge their
    birding-pieces.
  MRS. PAGE. Creep into the kiln-hole.
  FALSTAFF. Where is it?
  MRS. FORD. He will seek there, on my word. Neither press,  
    coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he hath an abstract for
    the remembrance of such places, and goes to them by his
    note. There is no hiding you in the house.
  FALSTAFF. I'll go out then.
  MRS. PAGE. If you go out in your own semblance, you die,
    Sir John. Unless you go out disguis'd.
  MRS. FORD. How might we disguise him?
  MRS. PAGE. Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's
    gown big enough for him; otherwise he might put on a
    hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and so escape.
  FALSTAFF. Good hearts, devise something; any extremity
    rather than a mischief.
  MRS. FORD. My Maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brainford, has
    a gown above.
  MRS. PAGE. On my word, it will serve him; she's as big as he
    is; and there's her thrumm'd hat, and her muffler too. Run
    up, Sir John.
  MRS. FORD. Go, go, sweet Sir John. Mistress Page and I will
    look some linen for your head.
  MRS. PAGE. Quick, quick; we'll come dress you straight. Put  
    on the gown the while.                         Exit FALSTAFF
  MRS. FORD. I would my husband would meet him in this
    shape; he cannot abide the old woman of Brainford; he
    swears she's a witch, forbade her my house, and hath
    threat'ned to beat her.
  MRS. PAGE. Heaven guide him to thy husband's cudgel; and
    the devil guide his cudgel afterwards!
  MRS. FORD. But is my husband coming?
  MRS. PAGE. Ay, in good sadness is he; and talks of the basket
    too, howsoever he hath had intelligence.
  MRS. FORD. We'll try that; for I'll appoint my men to carry
    the basket again, to meet him at the door with it as they
    did last time.
  MRS. PAGE. Nay, but he'll be here presently; let's go dress
    him like the witch of Brainford.
  MRS. FORD. I'll first direct my men what they shall do with
    the basket. Go up; I'll bring linen for him straight.   Exit
  MRS. PAGE. Hang him, dishonest varlet! we cannot misuse
    him enough.
    We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,  
    Wives may be merry and yet honest too.
    We do not act that often jest and laugh;
    'Tis old but true: Still swine eats all the draff.      Exit

            Re-enter MISTRESS FORD, with two SERVANTS

  MRS. FORD. Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders;
    your master is hard at door; if he bid you set it down, obey
    him; quickly, dispatch.                                 Exit
  FIRST SERVANT. Come, come, take it up.
  SECOND SERVANT. Pray heaven it be not full of knight again.
  FIRST SERVANT. I hope not; I had lief as bear so much lead.

    Enter FORD, PAGE, SHALLOW, CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS

  FORD. Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any
    way then to unfool me again? Set down the basket, villain!
    Somebody call my wife. Youth in a basket! O you panderly
    rascals, there's a knot, a ging, a pack, a conspiracy
    against me. Now shall the devil be sham'd. What, wife, I  
    say! Come, come forth; behold what honest clothes you
    send forth to bleaching.
  PAGE. Why, this passes, Master Ford; you are not to go loose
    any longer; you must be pinion'd.
  EVANS. Why, this is lunatics. This is mad as a mad dog.
  SHALLOW. Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.
  FORD. So say I too, sir.

                     Re-enter MISTRESS FORD

    Come hither, Mistress Ford; Mistress Ford, the honest
    woman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature, that hath
    the jealous fool to her husband! I suspect without cause,
    Mistress, do I?
  MRS. FORD. Heaven be my witness, you do, if you suspect
    me in any dishonesty.
  FORD. Well said, brazen-face; hold it out. Come forth, sirrah.
                           [Pulling clothes out of the basket]
  PAGE. This passes!
  MRS. FORD. Are you not asham'd? Let the clothes alone.  
  FORD. I shall find you anon.
  EVANS. 'Tis unreasonable. Will you take up your wife's
    clothes? Come away.
  FORD. Empty the basket, I say.
  MRS. FORD. Why, man, why?
  FORD. Master Page, as I am a man, there was one convey'd
    out of my house yesterday in this basket. Why may not
    he be there again? In my house I am sure he is; my
    intelligence is true; my jealousy is reasonable.
    Pluck me out all the linen.
  MRS. FORD. If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's
    death.
  PAGE. Here's no man.
  SHALLOW. By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford; this
    wrongs you.
  EVANS. Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the
    imaginations of your own heart; this is jealousies.
  FORD. Well, he's not here I seek for.
  PAGE. No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.
  FORD. Help to search my house this one time. If I find not  
    what I seek, show no colour for my extremity; let me for
    ever be your table sport; let them say of me 'As jealous as
    Ford, that search'd a hollow walnut for his wife's leman.'
    Satisfy me once more; once more search with me.
  MRS. FORD. What, hoa, Mistress Page! Come you and the old
    woman down; my husband will come into the chamber.
  FORD. Old woman? what old woman's that?
  MRS. FORD. Why, it is my maid's aunt of Brainford.
  FORD. A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not
    forbid her my house? She comes of errands, does she? We
    are simple men; we do not know what's brought to pass
    under the profession of fortune-telling. She works by
    charms, by spells, by th' figure, and such daub'ry as this
    is, beyond our element. We know nothing. Come down, you
    witch, you hag you; come down, I say.
  MRS. FORD. Nay, good sweet husband! Good gentlemen, let
    him not strike the old woman.

   Re-enter FALSTAFF in woman's clothes, and MISTRESS PAGE
  
  MRS. PAGE. Come, Mother Prat; come. give me your hand.
  FORD. I'll prat her.  [Beating him]  Out of my door, you
    witch, you hag, you. baggage, you polecat, you ronyon!
    Out, out! I'll conjure you, I'll fortune-tell you.
                                                   Exit FALSTAFF
  MRS. PAGE. Are you not asham'd? I think you have kill'd the
    poor woman.
  MRS. FORD. Nay, he will do it. 'Tis a goodly credit for you.
  FORD. Hang her, witch!
  EVANS. By yea and no, I think the oman is a witch indeed; I
    like not when a oman has a great peard; I spy a great peard
    under his muffler.
  FORD. Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you follow;
    see but the issue of my jealousy; if I cry out thus upon no
    trail, never trust me when I open again.
  PAGE. Let's obey his humour a little further. Come,
    gentlemen.            Exeunt all but MRS. FORD and MRS. PAGE
  MRS. PAGE. Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.
  MRS. FORD. Nay, by th' mass, that he did not; he beat him
    most unpitifully methought.  
  MRS. PAGE. I'll have the cudgel hallow'd and hung o'er the
    altar; it hath done meritorious service.
  MRS. FORD. What think you? May we, with the warrant of
    womanhood and the witness of a good conscience, pursue
    him with any further revenge?
  MRS. PAGE. The spirit of wantonness is sure scar'd out of
    him; if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and
    recovery, he will never, I think, in the way of waste,
    attempt us again.
  MRS. FORD. Shall we tell our husbands how we have serv'd
    him?
  MRS. PAGE. Yes, by all means; if it be but to scrape the
    figures out of your husband's brains. If they can find in their
    hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight shall be any further
    afflicted, we two will still be the ministers.
  MRS. FORD. I'll warrant they'll have him publicly sham'd;
    and methinks there would be no period to the jest, should
    he not be publicly sham'd.
  MRS. PAGE. Come, to the forge with it then; shape it. I
    would not have things cool.                           Exeunt  




SCENE 3.

The Garter Inn

Enter HOST and BARDOLPH

  BARDOLPH. Sir, the Germans desire to have three of your
    horses; the Duke himself will be to-morrow at court, and
    they are going to meet him.
  HOST. What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear
    not of him in the court. Let me speak with the gentlemen;
    they speak English?
  BARDOLPH. Ay, sir; I'll call them to you.
  HOST. They shall have my horses, but I'll make them pay;
    I'll sauce them; they have had my house a week at
    command; I have turn'd away my other guests. They must
    come off; I'll sauce them. Come.                      Exeunt




SCENE 4

FORD'S house

Enter PAGE, FORD, MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and SIR HUGH EVANS

  EVANS. 'Tis one of the best discretions of a oman as ever
    did look upon.
  PAGE. And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
  MRS. PAGE. Within a quarter of an hour.
  FORD. Pardon me, wife. Henceforth, do what thou wilt;
    I rather will suspect the sun with cold
    Than thee with wantonness. Now doth thy honour stand,
    In him that was of late an heretic,
    As firm as faith.
  PAGE. 'Tis well, 'tis well; no more.
    Be not as extreme in submission as in offence;
    But let our plot go forward. Let our wives
    Yet once again, to make us public sport,
    Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
    Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.  
  FORD. There is no better way than that they spoke of.
  PAGE. How? To send him word they'll meet him in the Park
    at midnight? Fie, fie! he'll never come!
  EVANS. You say he has been thrown in the rivers; and has
    been grievously peaten as an old oman; methinks there
    should be terrors in him, that he should not come;
    methinks his flesh is punish'd; he shall have no desires.
  PAGE. So think I too.
  MRS. FORD. Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
    And let us two devise to bring him thither.
  MRS. PAGE. There is an old tale goes that Heme the Hunter,
    Sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest,
    Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
    Walk round about an oak, with great ragg'd horns;
    And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
    And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
    In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
    You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
    The superstitious idle-headed eld
    Receiv'd, and did deliver to our age,  
    This tale of Heme the Hunter for a truth.
  PAGE. Why yet there want not many that do fear
    In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak.
    But what of this?
  MRS. FORD. Marry, this is our device-
    That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us,
    Disguis'd, like Heme, with huge horns on his head.
  PAGE. Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come,
    And in this shape. When you have brought him thither,
    What shall be done with him? What is your plot?
  MRS. PAGE. That likewise have we thought upon, and
    thus:
    Nan Page my daughter, and my little son,
    And three or four more of their growth, we'll dress
    Like urchins, ouphes, and fairies, green and white,
    With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
    And rattles in their hands; upon a sudden,
    As Falstaff, she, and I, are newly met,
    Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
    With some diffused song; upon their sight  
    We two in great amazedness will fly.
    Then let them all encircle him about,
    And fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight;
    And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
    In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
    In shape profane.
  MRS. FORD. And till he tell the truth,
    Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound,
    And burn him with their tapers.
  MRS. PAGE. The truth being known,
    We'll all present ourselves; dis-horn the spirit,
    And mock him home to Windsor.
  FORD. The children must
    Be practis'd well to this or they'll nev'r do 't.
  EVANS. I will teach the children their behaviours; and I will
    be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the knight with my
    taber.
  FORD. That will be excellent. I'll go buy them vizards.
  MRS. PAGE. My Nan shall be the Queen of all the Fairies,
    Finely attired in a robe of white.  
  PAGE. That silk will I go buy.  [Aside]  And in that time
    Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away,
    And marry her at Eton.-Go, send to Falstaff straight.
  FORD. Nay, I'll to him again, in name of Brook;
    He'll tell me all his purpose. Sure, he'll come.
  MRS. PAGE. Fear not you that. Go get us properties
    And tricking for our fairies.
  EVANS. Let us about it. It is admirable pleasures, and fery
    honest knaveries.               Exeunt PAGE, FORD, and EVANS
  MRS. PAGE. Go, Mistress Ford.
    Send Quickly to Sir John to know his mind.
                                                  Exit MRS. FORD
    I'll to the Doctor; he hath my good will,
    And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
    That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot;
    And he my husband best of all affects.
    The Doctor is well money'd, and his friends
    Potent at court; he, none but he, shall have her,
    Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.      Exit




SCENE 5.

The Garter Inn

Enter HOST and SIMPLE

  HOST. What wouldst thou have, boor? What, thick-skin?
    Speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.
  SIMPLE. Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff
    from Master Slender.
  HOST. There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his
    standing-bed and truckle-bed; 'tis painted about with the
    story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go, knock and can; he'll
    speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee. Knock, I say.
  SIMPLE. There's an old woman, a fat woman, gone up into
    his chamber; I'll be so bold as stay, sir, till she come down;
    I come to speak with her, indeed.
  HOST. Ha! a fat woman? The knight may be robb'd. I'll call.
    Bully knight! Bully Sir John! Speak from thy lungs
    military. Art thou there? It is thine host, thine Ephesian, calls.
  FALSTAFF.  [Above]  How now, mine host?
  HOST. Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of  
    thy fat woman. Let her descend, bully, let her descend;
    my chambers are honourible. Fie, privacy, fie!

                    Enter FALSTAFF

  FALSTAFF. There was, mine host, an old fat woman even
    now with, me; but she's gone.
  SIMPLE. Pray you, sir, was't not the wise woman of
    Brainford?
  FALSTAFF. Ay, marry was it, mussel-shell. What would you
    with her?
  SIMPLE. My master, sir, my Master Slender, sent to her,
    seeing her go thorough the streets, to know, sir, whether one
    Nym, sir, that beguil'd him of a chain, had the chain or no.
  FALSTAFF. I spake with the old woman about it.
  SIMPLE. And what says she, I pray, sir?
  FALSTAFF Marry, she says that the very same man that
    beguil'd Master Slender of his chain cozen'd him of it.
  SIMPLE. I would I could have spoken with the woman
    herself; I had other things to have spoken with her too,  
    from him.
  FALSTAFF. What are they? Let us know.
  HOST. Ay, come; quick.
  SIMPLE. I may not conceal them, sir.
  FALSTAFF. Conceal them, or thou diest.
    SIMPLE.. Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress
    Anne Page: to know if it were my master's fortune to
    have her or no.
  FALSTAFF. 'Tis, 'tis his fortune.
  SIMPLE. What sir?
  FALSTAFF. To have her, or no. Go; say the woman told me
    so.
  SIMPLE. May I be bold to say so, sir?
  FALSTAFF. Ay, sir, like who more bold?
  SIMPLE., I thank your worship; I shall make my master glad
    with these tidings.                              Exit SIMPLE
  HOST. Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was
    there a wise woman with thee?
  FALSTAFF. Ay, that there was, mine host; one that hath
    taught me more wit than ever I learn'd before in my life;  
    and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for my
    learning.

                    Enter BARDOLPH

  BARDOLPH. Out, alas, sir, cozenage, mere cozenage!
  HOST. Where be my horses? Speak well of them, varletto.
  BARDOLPH. Run away with the cozeners; for so soon as I
    came beyond Eton, they threw me off from behind one of
    them, in a slough of mire; and set spurs and away, like
    three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.
  HOST. They are gone but to meet the Duke, villain; do not
    say they be fled. Germans are honest men.

                 Enter SIR HUGH EVANS

  EVANS. Where is mine host?
  HOST. What is the matter, sir?
  EVANS. Have a care of your entertainments. There is a friend
    of mine come to town tells me there is three  
    cozen-germans that has cozen'd all the hosts of Readins,
    of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and money. I tell you for
    good will, look you; you are wise, and full of gibes and
    vlouting-stogs, and 'tis not convenient you should be
    cozened. Fare you well.                                 Exit

                  Enter DOCTOR CAIUS

  CAIUS. Vere is mine host de Jarteer?
  HOST. Here, Master Doctor, in perplexity and doubtful
    dilemma.
  CAIUS. I cannot tell vat is dat; but it is tell-a me dat you
    make grand preparation for a Duke de Jamany. By my
    trot, dere is no duke that the court is know to come; I
    tell you for good will. Adieu.                          Exit
  HOST. Hue and cry, villain, go! Assist me, knight; I am
    undone. Fly, run, hue and cry, villain; I am undone.
                                        Exeunt HOST and BARDOLPH
  FALSTAFF. I would all the world might be cozen'd, for I have
    been cozen'd and beaten too. If it should come to the car  
    of the court how I have been transformed, and how my
    transformation hath been wash'd and cudgell'd, they
    would melt me out of my fat, drop by drop, and liquor
    fishermen's boots with me; I warrant they would whip me
    with their fine wits till I were as crestfall'n as a dried pear.
    I never prosper'd since I forswore myself at primero. Well,
    if my wind were but long enough to say my prayers,
    would repent.

                Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY

    Now! whence come you?
  QUICKLY. From the two parties, forsooth.
  FALSTAFF. The devil take one party and his dam the other!
    And so they shall be both bestowed. I have suffer'd more
    for their sakes, more than the villainous inconstancy of
    man's disposition is able to bear.
  QUICKLY. And have not they suffer'd? Yes, I warrant;
    speciously one of them; Mistress Ford, good heart, is beaten
    black and blue, that you cannot see a white spot about her.  
  FALSTAFF. What tell'st thou me of black and blue? I was
    beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow; and
    was like to be apprehended for the witch of Brainford. But
    that my admirable dexterity of wit, my counterfeiting the
    action of an old woman, deliver'd me, the knave constable
    had set me i' th' stocks, i' th' common stocks, for a witch.
  QUICKLY. Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber; you
    shall hear how things go, and, I warrant, to your content.
    Here is a letter will say somewhat. Good hearts, what ado
    here is to bring you together! Sure, one of you does not
    serve heaven well, that you are so cross'd.
  FALSTAFF. Come up into my chamber.                      Exeunt




SCENE 6.

The Garter Inn

Enter FENTON and HOST

  HOST. Master Fenton, talk not to me; my mind is heavy; I
    will give over all.
  FENTON. Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
    And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give the
    A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.
  HOST. I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will, at the least,
    keep your counsel.
  FENTON. From time to time I have acquainted you
    With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page;
    Who, mutually, hath answer'd my affection,
    So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
    Even to my wish. I have a letter from her
    Of such contents as you will wonder at;
    The mirth whereof so larded with my matter
    That neither, singly, can be manifested
    Without the show of both. Fat Falstaff  
    Hath a great scene. The image of the jest
    I'll show you here at large. Hark, good mine host:
    To-night at Heme's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one,
    Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen-
    The purpose why is here-in which disguise,
    While other jests are something rank on foot,
    Her father hath commanded her to slip
    Away with Slender, and with him at Eton
    Immediately to marry; she hath consented.
    Now, sir,
    Her mother, even strong against that match
    And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed
    That he shall likewise shuffle her away
    While other sports are tasking of their minds,
    And at the dean'ry, where a priest attends,
    Straight marry her. To this her mother's plot
    She seemingly obedient likewise hath
    Made promise to the doctor. Now thus it rests:
    Her father means she shall be all in white;
    And in that habit, when Slender sees his time  
    To take her by the hand and bid her go,
    She shall go with him; her mother hath intended
    The better to denote her to the doctor-
    For they must all be mask'd and vizarded-
    That quaint in green she shall be loose enrob'd,
    With ribands pendent, flaring 'bout her head;
    And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
    To pinch her by the hand, and, on that token,
    The maid hath given consent to go with him.
  HOST. Which means she to deceive, father or mother?
  FENTON. Both, my good host, to go along with me.
    And here it rests-that you'll procure the vicar
    To stay for me at church, 'twixt twelve and one,
    And in the lawful name of marrying,
    To give our hearts united ceremony.
  HOST. Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar.
    Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
  FENTON. So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
    Besides, I'll make a present recompense.              Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE 1.

The Garter Inn

Enter FALSTAFF and MISTRESS QUICKLY

  FALSTAFF. Prithee, no more prattling; go. I'll, hold. This is
    the third time; I hope good luck lies in odd numbers.
    Away, go; they say there is divinity in odd numbers, either
    in nativity, chance, or death. Away.
  QUICKLY. I'll provide you a chain, and I'll do what I can to
    get you a pair of horns.
  FALSTAFF. Away, I say; time wears; hold up your head, and
    mince.                                     Exit MRS. QUICKLY

                 Enter FORD disguised

    How now, Master Brook. Master Brook, the matter will
    be known tonight or never. Be you in the Park about
    midnight, at Herne's oak, and you shall see wonders.
  FORD. Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told me
    you had appointed?  
  FALSTAFF. I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a
    poor old man; but I came from her, Master Brook, like a
    poor old woman. That same knave Ford, her husband, hath
    the finest mad devil of jealousy in him, Master Brook, that
    ever govern'd frenzy. I will tell you-he beat me grievously
    in the shape of a woman; for in the shape of man, Master
    Brook, I fear not Goliath with a weaver's beam; because
    I know also life is a shuttle. I am in haste; go along with
    me; I'll. tell you all, Master Brook. Since I pluck'd geese,
    play'd truant, and whipp'd top, I knew not what 'twas to
    be beaten till lately. Follow me. I'll tell you strange things
    of this knave-Ford, on whom to-night I will be revenged,
    and I will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow. Strange
    things in hand, Master Brook! Follow.                 Exeunt




SCENE 2.

Windsor Park

Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER

  PAGE. Come, come; we'll couch i' th' Castle ditch till we
    see the light of our fairies. Remember, son Slender, my daughter.
  SLENDER. Ay, forsooth; I have spoke with her, and we have
    a nay-word how to know one another. I come to her in
    white and cry 'mum'; she cries 'budget,' and by that we
    know one another.
  SHALLOW. That's good too; but what needs either your mum
    or her budget? The white will decipher her well enough.
    It hath struck ten o'clock.
  PAGE. The night is dark; light and spirits will become it well.
    Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil but the
    devil, and we shall know him by his horns. Let's away;
    follow me.                                            Exeunt




SCENE 3.

A street leading to the Park

Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and DOCTOR CAIUS

  MRS. PAGE. Master Doctor, my daughter is in green; when
    you see your time, take her by the hand, away with her to
    the deanery, and dispatch it quickly. Go before into the
    Park; we two must go together.
  CAIUS. I know vat I have to do; adieu.
  MRS. PAGE. Fare you well, sir.  [Exit CAIUS]  My husband
    will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will
    chafe at the doctor's marrying my daughter; but 'tis no
    matter; better a little chiding than a great deal of
    heartbreak.
  MRS. FORD. Where is Nan now, and her troop of fairies, and
    the Welsh devil, Hugh?
  MRS. PAGE. They are all couch'd in a pit hard by Heme's
    oak, with obscur'd lights; which, at the very instant of
    Falstaff's and our meeting, they will at once display to the
    night.
  MRS. FORD. That cannot choose but amaze him.
  MRS. PAGE. If he be not amaz'd, he will be mock'd; if he be  
    amaz'd, he will every way be mock'd.
  MRS. FORD. We'll betray him finely.
  MRS. PAGE. Against such lewdsters and their lechery,
    Those that betray them do no treachery.
  MRS. FORD. The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 4.

Windsor Park

Enter SIR HUGH EVANS like a satyr, with OTHERS as fairies

  EVANS. Trib, trib, fairies; come; and remember your parts.
    Be pold, I pray you; follow me into the pit; and when I
    give the watch-ords, do as I pid you. Come, come; trib,
    trib.                                                 Exeunt




SCENE 5.

Another part of the Park

Enter FALSTAFF disguised as HERNE

  FALSTAFF. The Windsor bell hath struck twelve; the minute
    draws on. Now the hot-blooded gods assist me!
    Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy Europa; love set on thy
    horns. O powerful love! that in some respects makes a
    beast a man; in some other a man a beast. You were also,
    Jupiter, a swan, for the love of Leda. O omnipotent love!
    how near the god drew to the complexion of a goose! A
    fault done first in the form of a beast-O Jove, a beastly
    fault!-and then another fault in the semblance of a fowl-
    think on't, Jove, a foul fault! When gods have hot backs
    what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a Windsor
    stag; and the fattest, I think, i' th' forest. Send me a cool
    rut-time, Jove, or who can blame me to piss my tallow?
    Who comes here? my doe?

        Enter MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE  

  MRS. FORD. Sir John! Art thou there, my deer, my male deer.
  FALSTAFF. My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain
    potatoes; let it thunder to the tune of Greensleeves, hail
    kissing-comfits, and snow eringoes; let there come a tempest
    of provocation, I will shelter me here.      [Embracing her]
  MRS. FORD. Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
  FALSTAFF. Divide me like a brib'd buck, each a haunch; I
    will keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for the fellow
    of this walk, and my horns I bequeath your husbands. Am
    I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Heme the Hunter? Why,
    now is Cupid a child of conscience; he makes restitution.
    As I am a true spirit, welcome!           [A noise of horns]
  MRS. PAGE. Alas, what noise?
  MRS. FORD. Heaven forgive our sins!
  FALSTAFF. What should this be?
  MRS. FORD. } Away, away.
  MRS. PAGE. } Away, away.                        [They run off]
  FALSTAFF. I think the devil will not have me damn'd, lest the
    oil that's in me should set hell on fire; he would never else  
    cross me thus.

        Enter SIR HUGH EVANS like a satyr, ANNE PAGE as
      a fairy, and OTHERS as the Fairy Queen, fairies, and
               Hobgoblin; all with tapers

  FAIRY QUEEN. Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
    You moonshine revellers, and shades of night,
    You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
    Attend your office and your quality.
    Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.
  PUCK. Elves, list your names; silence, you airy toys.
    Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap;
    Where fires thou find'st unrak'd, and hearths unswept,
    There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry;
    Our radiant Queen hates sluts and sluttery.
  FALSTAFF. They are fairies; he that speaks to them shall die.
    I'll wink and couch; no man their works must eye.
                                       [Lies down upon his face]
  EVANS. Where's Pede? Go you, and where you find a maid  
    That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said,
    Raise up the organs of her fantasy
    Sleep she as sound as careless infancy;
    But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
    Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins.
  FAIRY QUEEN. About, about;
    Search Windsor castle, elves, within and out;
    Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room,
    That it may stand till the perpetual doom
    In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit,
    Worthy the owner and the owner it.
    The several chairs of order look you scour
    With juice of balm and every precious flower;
    Each fair instalment, coat, and sev'ral crest,
    With loyal blazon, evermore be blest!
    And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
    Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring;
    Th' expressure that it bears, green let it be,
    More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
    And 'Honi soit qui mal y pense' write  
    In em'rald tufts, flow'rs purple, blue and white;
    Like sapphire, pearl, and rich embroidery,
    Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee.
    Fairies use flow'rs for their charactery.
    Away, disperse; but till 'tis one o'clock,
    Our dance of custom round about the oak
    Of Herne the Hunter let us not forget.
  EVANS. Pray you, lock hand in hand; yourselves in order set;
    And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
    To guide our measure round about the tree.
    But, stay. I smell a man of middle earth.
  FALSTAFF. Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy, lest he
    transform me to a piece of cheese!
  PUCK. Vile worm, thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth.
  FAIRY QUEEN. With trial-fire touch me his finger-end;
    If he be chaste, the flame will back descend,
    And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
    It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.
  PUCK. A trial, come.
  EVANS. Come, will this wood take fire?  
             [They put the tapers to his fingers, and he starts]
  FALSTAFF. Oh, oh, oh!
  FAIRY QUEEN. Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
    About him, fairies; sing a scornful rhyme;
    And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.
  THE SONG.
    Fie on sinful fantasy!
    Fie on lust and luxury!
    Lust is but a bloody fire,
    Kindled with unchaste desire,
    Fed in heart, whose flames aspire,
    As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
    Pinch him, fairies, mutually;
    Pinch him for his villainy;
    Pinch him and burn him and turn him about,
    Till candles and star-light and moonshine be out.

        During this song they pinch FALSTAFF. DOCTOR
        CAIUS comes one way, and steals away a fairy in
        green; SLENDER another way, and takes off a fairy in  
        white; and FENTON steals away ANNE PAGE. A noise
        of hunting is heard within. All the fairies run away.
        FALSTAFF pulls off his buck's head, and rises

       Enter PAGE, FORD, MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and
                        SIR HUGH EVANS

  PAGE. Nay, do not fly; I think we have watch'd you now.
    Will none but Heme the Hunter serve your turn?
  MRS. PAGE. I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher.
    Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
    See you these, husband? Do not these fair yokes
    Become the forest better than the town?
  FORD. Now, sir, who's a cuckold now? Master Brook,
    Falstaff's a knave, a cuckoldly knave; here are his horns,
    Master Brook; and, Master Brook, he hath enjoyed nothing of
    Ford's but his buck-basket, his cudgel, and twenty pounds
    of money, which must be paid to Master Brook; his horses
    are arrested for it, Master Brook.
  MRS. FORD. Sir John, we have had ill luck; we could never  
    meet. I will never take you for my love again; but I will
    always count you my deer.
  FALSTAFF. I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.
  FORD. Ay, and an ox too; both the proofs are extant.
  FALSTAFF. And these are not fairies? I was three or four
    times in the thought they were not fairies; and yet the
    guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of my powers,
    drove the grossness of the foppery into a receiv'd belief,
    in despite of the teeth of all rhyme and reason, that they
    were fairies. See now how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent
    when 'tis upon ill employment.
  EVANS. Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires,
    and fairies will not pinse you.
  FORD. Well said, fairy Hugh.
  EVANS. And leave you your jealousies too, I pray you.
  FORD. I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou art able
    to woo her in good English.
  FALSTAFF. Have I laid my brain in the sun, and dried it, that
    it wants matter to prevent so gross, o'er-reaching as this?
    Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too? Shall I have a cox-comb  
    of frieze? 'Tis time I were chok'd with a piece of
    toasted cheese.
  EVANS. Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all
    putter.
  FALSTAFF. 'Seese' and 'putter'! Have I liv'd to stand at the
    taunt of one that makes fritters of English? This is enough
    to be the decay of lust and late-walking through the realm.
  MRS. PAGE. Why, Sir John, do you think, though we would
    have thrust virtue out of our hearts by the head and
    shoulders, and have given ourselves without scruple to hell,
    that ever the devil could have made you our delight?
  FORD. What, a hodge-pudding? a bag of flax?
  MRS. PAGE. A puff'd man?
  PAGE. Old, cold, wither'd, and of intolerable entrails?
  FORD. And one that is as slanderous as Satan?
  PAGE. And as poor as Job?
  FORD. And as wicked as his wife?
  EVANS. And given to fornications, and to taverns, and sack,
    and wine, and metheglins, and to drinkings, and swearings,
    and starings, pribbles and prabbles?  
  FALSTAFF. Well, I am your theme; you have the start of me;
    I am dejected; I am not able to answer the Welsh flannel;
    ignorance itself is a plummet o'er me; use me as you will.
  FORD. Marry, sir, we'll bring you to Windsor, to one Master
    Brook, that you have cozen'd of money, to whom you
    should have been a pander. Over and above that you have
    suffer'd, I think to repay that money will be a biting
    affliction.
  PAGE. Yet be cheerful, knight; thou shalt eat a posset
    tonight at my house, where I will desire thee to laugh at my
    wife, that now laughs at thee. Tell her Master Slender hath
    married her daughter.
  MRS. PAGE.  [Aside]  Doctors doubt that; if Anne Page be
    my daughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius' wife.

                        Enter SLENDER

  SLENDER. Whoa, ho, ho, father Page!
  PAGE. Son, how now! how now, son! Have you dispatch'd'?
  SLENDER. Dispatch'd! I'll make the best in Gloucestershire  
    know on't; would I were hang'd, la, else!
  PAGE. Of what, son?
  SLENDER. I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne
    Page, and she's a great lubberly boy. If it had not been i'
    th' church, I would have swing'd him, or he should have
    swing'd me. If I did not think it had been Anne Page,
    would I might never stir!-and 'tis a postmaster's boy.
  PAGE. Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
  SLENDER. What need you tell me that? I think so, when I
    took a boy for a girl. If I had been married to him, for all
    he was in woman's apparel, I would not have had him.
  PAGE. Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you how
    you should know my daughter by her garments?
  SLENDER. I went to her in white and cried 'mum' and she
    cried 'budget' as Anne and I had appointed; and yet it was
    not Anne, but a postmaster's boy.
  MRS. PAGE. Good George, be not angry. I knew of your
    purpose; turn'd my daughter into green; and, indeed, she
    is now with the Doctor at the dean'ry, and there married.
  
                         Enter CAIUS

  CAIUS. Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened; I ha'
    married un garcon, a boy; un paysan, by gar, a boy; it is
    not Anne Page; by gar, I am cozened.
  MRS. PAGE. Why, did you take her in green?
  CAIUS. Ay, be gar, and 'tis a boy; be gar, I'll raise all
    Windsor.                                          Exit CAIUS
  FORD. This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?
  PAGE. My heart misgives me; here comes Master Fenton.

                  Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE

    How now, Master Fenton!
  ANNE. Pardon, good father. Good my mother, pardon.
  PAGE. Now, Mistress, how chance you went not with Master
    Slender?
  MRS. PAGE. Why went you not with Master Doctor, maid?
  FENTON. You do amaze her. Hear the truth of it.
    You would have married her most shamefully,  
    Where there was no proportion held in love.
    The truth is, she and I, long since contracted,
    Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
    Th' offence is holy that she hath committed;
    And this deceit loses the name of craft,
    Of disobedience, or unduteous title,
    Since therein she doth evitate and shun
    A thousand irreligious cursed hours,
    Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.
  FORD. Stand not amaz'd; here is no remedy.
    In love, the heavens themselves do guide the state;
    Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.
  FALSTAFF. I am glad, though you have ta'en a special stand
    to strike at me, that your arrow hath glanc'd.
  PAGE. Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
    What cannot be eschew'd must be embrac'd.
  FALSTAFF. When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chas'd.
  MRS. PAGE. Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton,
    Heaven give you many, many merry days!
    Good husband, let us every one go home,  
    And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire;
    Sir John and all.
  FORD. Let it be so. Sir John,
    To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word;
    For he, to-night, shall lie with Mistress Ford.       Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1596

A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  THESEUS, Duke of Athens
  EGEUS, father to Hermia
  LYSANDER, in love with Hermia
  DEMETRIUS, in love with Hermia
  PHILOSTRATE, Master of the Revels to Theseus
  QUINCE, a carpenter
  SNUG, a joiner
  BOTTOM, a weaver
  FLUTE, a bellows-mender
  SNOUT, a tinker
  STARVELING, a tailor

  HIPPOLYTA, Queen of the Amazons, bethrothed to Theseus
  HERMIA, daughter to Egeus, in love with Lysander
  HELENA, in love with Demetrius

  OBERON, King of the Fairies
  TITANIA, Queen of the Fairies
  PUCK, or ROBIN GOODFELLOW
  PEASEBLOSSOM, fairy  
  COBWEB, fairy
  MOTH, fairy
  MUSTARDSEED, fairy

  PROLOGUE, PYRAMUS, THISBY, WALL, MOONSHINE, LION are presented by:
    QUINCE, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, STARVELING, AND SNUG

  Other Fairies attending their King and Queen
  Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Athens and a wood near it


ACT I. SCENE I.
Athens. The palace of THESEUS

Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and ATTENDANTS

  THESEUS. Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
    Draws on apace; four happy days bring in
    Another moon; but, O, methinks, how slow
    This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires,
    Like to a step-dame or a dowager,
    Long withering out a young man's revenue.
  HIPPOLYTA. Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
    Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
    And then the moon, like to a silver bow
    New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
    Of our solemnities.
  THESEUS. Go, Philostrate,
    Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;
    Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;
    Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
    The pale companion is not for our pomp.     Exit PHILOSTRATE
    Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword,  
    And won thy love doing thee injuries;
    But I will wed thee in another key,
    With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling.

          Enter EGEUS, and his daughter HERMIA, LYSANDER,
                           and DEMETRIUS

  EGEUS. Happy be Theseus, our renowned Duke!
  THESEUS. Thanks, good Egeus; what's the news with thee?
  EGEUS. Full of vexation come I, with complaint
    Against my child, my daughter Hermia.
    Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,
    This man hath my consent to marry her.
    Stand forth, Lysander. And, my gracious Duke,
    This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child.
    Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,
    And interchang'd love-tokens with my child;
    Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,
    With feigning voice, verses of feigning love,
    And stol'n the impression of her fantasy  
    With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits,
    Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats- messengers
    Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth;
    With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart;
    Turn'd her obedience, which is due to me,
    To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke,
    Be it so she will not here before your Grace
    Consent to marry with Demetrius,
    I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
    As she is mine I may dispose of her;
    Which shall be either to this gentleman
    Or to her death, according to our law
    Immediately provided in that case.
  THESEUS. What say you, Hermia? Be advis'd, fair maid.
    To you your father should be as a god;
    One that compos'd your beauties; yea, and one
    To whom you are but as a form in wax,
    By him imprinted, and within his power
    To leave the figure, or disfigure it.
    Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.  
  HERMIA. So is Lysander.
  THESEUS. In himself he is;
    But, in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
    The other must be held the worthier.
  HERMIA. I would my father look'd but with my eyes.
  THESEUS. Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
  HERMIA. I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
    I know not by what power I am made bold,
    Nor how it may concern my modesty
    In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
    But I beseech your Grace that I may know
    The worst that may befall me in this case,
    If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
  THESEUS. Either to die the death, or to abjure
    For ever the society of men.
    Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
    Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
    Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
    You can endure the livery of a nun,
    For aye to be shady cloister mew'd,  
    To live a barren sister all your life,
    Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
    Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood
    To undergo such maiden pilgrimage;
    But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd
    Than that which withering on the virgin thorn
    Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.
  HERMIA. So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
    Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
    Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke
    My soul consents not to give sovereignty.
  THESEUS. Take time to pause; and by the next new moon-
    The sealing-day betwixt my love and me
    For everlasting bond of fellowship-
    Upon that day either prepare to die
    For disobedience to your father's will,
    Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
    Or on Diana's altar to protest
    For aye austerity and single life.
  DEMETRIUS. Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield  
    Thy crazed title to my certain right.
  LYSANDER. You have her father's love, Demetrius;
    Let me have Hermia's; do you marry him.
  EGEUS. Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
    And what is mine my love shall render him;
    And she is mine; and all my right of her
    I do estate unto Demetrius.
  LYSANDER. I am, my lord, as well deriv'd as he,
    As well possess'd; my love is more than his;
    My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd,
    If not with vantage, as Demetrius';
    And, which is more than all these boasts can be,
    I am belov'd of beauteous Hermia.
    Why should not I then prosecute my right?
    Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
    Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
    And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
    Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
    Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
  THESEUS. I must confess that I have heard so much,  
    And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
    But, being over-full of self-affairs,
    My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come;
    And come, Egeus; you shall go with me;
    I have some private schooling for you both.
    For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
    To fit your fancies to your father's will,
    Or else the law of Athens yields you up-
    Which by no means we may extenuate-
    To death, or to a vow of single life.
    Come, my Hippolyta; what cheer, my love?
    Demetrius, and Egeus, go along;
    I must employ you in some business
    Against our nuptial, and confer with you
    Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
  EGEUS. With duty and desire we follow you.
                              Exeunt all but LYSANDER and HERMIA
  LYSANDER. How now, my love! Why is your cheek so pale?
    How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
  HERMIA. Belike for want of rain, which I could well  
    Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
  LYSANDER. Ay me! for aught that I could ever read,
    Could ever hear by tale or history,
    The course of true love never did run smooth;
    But either it was different in blood-
  HERMIA. O cross! too high to be enthrall'd to low.
  LYSANDER. Or else misgraffed in respect of years-
  HERMIA. O spite! too old to be engag'd to young.
  LYSANDER. Or else it stood upon the choice of friends-
  HERMIA. O hell! to choose love by another's eyes.
  LYSANDER. Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
    War, death, or sickness, did lay siege to it,
    Making it momentary as a sound,
    Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
    Brief as the lightning in the collied night
    That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
    And ere a man hath power to say 'Behold!'
    The jaws of darkness do devour it up;
    So quick bright things come to confusion.
  HERMIA. If then true lovers have ever cross'd,  
    It stands as an edict in destiny.
    Then let us teach our trial patience,
    Because it is a customary cross,
    As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
    Wishes and tears, poor Fancy's followers.
  LYSANDER. A good persuasion; therefore, hear me, Hermia.
    I have a widow aunt, a dowager
    Of great revenue, and she hath no child-
    From Athens is her house remote seven leagues-
    And she respects me as her only son.
    There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
    And to that place the sharp Athenian law
    Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,
    Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night;
    And in the wood, a league without the town,
    Where I did meet thee once with Helena
    To do observance to a morn of May,
    There will I stay for thee.
  HERMIA. My good Lysander!
    I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow,  
    By his best arrow, with the golden head,
    By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
    By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
    And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage Queen,
    When the false Troyan under sail was seen,
    By all the vows that ever men have broke,
    In number more than ever women spoke,
    In that same place thou hast appointed me,
    To-morrow truly will I meet with thee.
  LYSANDER. Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.

                         Enter HELENA

  HERMIA. God speed fair Helena! Whither away?
  HELENA. Call you me fair? That fair again unsay.
    Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
    Your eyes are lode-stars and your tongue's sweet air
    More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear,
    When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
    Sickness is catching; O, were favour so,  
    Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go!
    My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
    My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody.
    Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
    The rest I'd give to be to you translated.
    O, teach me how you look, and with what art
    You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart!
  HERMIA. I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
  HELENA. O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
  HERMIA. I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
  HELENA. O that my prayers could such affection move!
  HERMIA. The more I hate, the more he follows me.
  HELENA. The more I love, the more he hateth me.
  HERMIA. His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
  HELENA. None, but your beauty; would that fault were mine!
  HERMIA. Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;
    Lysander and myself will fly this place.
    Before the time I did Lysander see,
    Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me.
    O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,  
    That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell!
  LYSANDER. Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:
    To-morrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
    Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass,
    Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass,
    A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal,
    Through Athens' gates have we devis'd to steal.
  HERMIA. And in the wood where often you and I
    Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
    Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
    There my Lysander and myself shall meet;
    And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,
    To seek new friends and stranger companies.
    Farewell, sweet playfellow; pray thou for us,
    And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
    Keep word, Lysander; we must starve our sight
    From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.
  LYSANDER. I will, my Hermia. [Exit HERMIA] Helena, adieu;
    As you on him, Demetrius dote on you.                   Exit
  HELENA. How happy some o'er other some can be!  
    Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
    But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
    He will not know what all but he do know.
    And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
    So I, admiring of his qualities.
    Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
    Love can transpose to form and dignity.
    Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;
    And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind.
    Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste;
    Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste;
    And therefore is Love said to be a child,
    Because in choice he is so oft beguil'd.
    As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
    So the boy Love is perjur'd everywhere;
    For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne,
    He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine;
    And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
    So he dissolv'd, and show'rs of oaths did melt.
    I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight;  
    Then to the wood will he to-morrow night
    Pursue her; and for this intelligence
    If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
    But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
    To have his sight thither and back again.               Exit




SCENE II.
Athens. QUINCE'S house

Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING

  QUINCE. Is all our company here?
  BOTTOM. You were best to call them generally, man by man, according
    to the scrip.
  QUINCE. Here is the scroll of every man's name which is thought
    fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the Duke
    and the Duchess on his wedding-day at night.
  BOTTOM. First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on; then
    read the names of the actors; and so grow to a point.
  QUINCE. Marry, our play is 'The most Lamentable Comedy and most
    Cruel Death of Pyramus and Thisby.'
  BOTTOM. A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry. Now,
    good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll. Masters,
    spread yourselves.
  QUINCE. Answer, as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.
  BOTTOM. Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.
  QUINCE. You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.  
  BOTTOM. What is Pyramus? A lover, or a tyrant?
  QUINCE. A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love.
  BOTTOM. That will ask some tears in the true performing of it. If I
    do it, let the audience look to their eyes; I will move storms; I
    will condole in some measure. To the rest- yet my chief humour is
    for a tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat
    in, to make all split.

                 'The raging rocks
                 And shivering shocks
                 Shall break the locks
                   Of prison gates;

                 And Phibbus' car
                 Shall shine from far,
                 And make and mar
                   The foolish Fates.'

    This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players. This is
    Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein: a lover is more condoling.  
  QUINCE. Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.
  FLUTE. Here, Peter Quince.
  QUINCE. Flute, you must take Thisby on you.
  FLUTE. What is Thisby? A wand'ring knight?
  QUINCE. It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
  FLUTE. Nay, faith, let not me play a woman; I have a beard coming.
  QUINCE. That's all one; you shall play it in a mask, and you may
    speak as small as you will.
  BOTTOM. An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too.
    I'll speak in a monstrous little voice: 'Thisne, Thisne!'
    [Then speaking small] 'Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy
    Thisby dear, and lady dear!'
  QUINCE. No, no, you must play Pyramus; and, Flute, you Thisby.
  BOTTOM. Well, proceed.
  QUINCE. Robin Starveling, the tailor.
  STARVELING. Here, Peter Quince.
  QUINCE. Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother.
    Tom Snout, the tinker.
  SNOUT. Here, Peter Quince.
  QUINCE. You, Pyramus' father; myself, Thisby's father; Snug, the  
    joiner, you, the lion's part. And, I hope, here is a play fitted.
  SNUG. Have you the lion's part written? Pray you, if it be, give it
    me, for I am slow of study.
  QUINCE. You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
  BOTTOM. Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will do any
    man's heart good to hear me; I will roar that I will make the
    Duke say 'Let him roar again, let him roar again.'
  QUINCE. An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the
    Duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek; and that were
    enough to hang us all.
  ALL. That would hang us, every mother's son.
  BOTTOM. I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out
    of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us;
    but I will aggravate my voice so, that I will roar you as gently
    as any sucking dove; I will roar you an 'twere any nightingale.
  QUINCE. You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a
    sweet-fac'd man; a proper man, as one shall see in a summer's
    day; a most lovely gentleman-like man; therefore you must needs
    play Pyramus.
  BOTTOM. Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play  
    it in?
  QUINCE. Why, what you will.
  BOTTOM. I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard, your
    orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your
    French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.
  QUINCE. Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then
    you will play bare-fac'd. But, masters, here are your parts; and
    I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to con them by
    to-morrow night; and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without
    the town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse; for if we meet in
    the city, we shall be dogg'd with company, and our devices known.
    In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties, such as our
    play wants. I pray you, fail me not.
  BOTTOM. We will meet; and there we may rehearse most obscenely and
    courageously. Take pains; be perfect; adieu.
  QUINCE. At the Duke's oak we meet.
  BOTTOM. Enough; hold, or cut bow-strings.               Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.
A wood near Athens

Enter a FAIRY at One door, and PUCK at another

  PUCK. How now, spirit! whither wander you?
  FAIRY.      Over hill, over dale,
                Thorough bush, thorough brier,
              Over park, over pale,
                Thorough flood, thorough fire,
              I do wander every where,
              Swifter than the moon's sphere;
              And I serve the Fairy Queen,
              To dew her orbs upon the green.
              The cowslips tall her pensioners be;
              In their gold coats spots you see;
              Those be rubies, fairy favours,
              In those freckles live their savours.

    I must go seek some dewdrops here,
    And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.
    Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I'll be gone.  
    Our Queen and all her elves come here anon.
  PUCK. The King doth keep his revels here to-night;
    Take heed the Queen come not within his sight;
    For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
    Because that she as her attendant hath
    A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king.
    She never had so sweet a changeling;
    And jealous Oberon would have the child
    Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild;
    But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
    Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
    And now they never meet in grove or green,
    By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,
    But they do square, that all their elves for fear
    Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
  FAIRY. Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
    Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
    Call'd Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
    That frights the maidens of the villagery,
    Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern,  
    And bootless make the breathless housewife churn,
    And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
    Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
    Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,
    You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
    Are not you he?
  PUCK. Thou speakest aright:
    I am that merry wanderer of the night.
    I jest to Oberon, and make him smile
    When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
    Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;
    And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl
    In very likeness of a roasted crab,
    And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob,
    And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
    The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
    Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
    Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
    And 'tailor' cries, and falls into a cough;
    And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh,  
    And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear
    A merrier hour was never wasted there.
    But room, fairy, here comes Oberon.
  FAIRY. And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!

       Enter OBERON at one door, with his TRAIN, and TITANIA,
                        at another, with hers

  OBERON. Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.
  TITANIA. What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence;
    I have forsworn his bed and company.
  OBERON. Tarry, rash wanton; am not I thy lord?
  TITANIA. Then I must be thy lady; but I know
    When thou hast stolen away from fairy land,
    And in the shape of Corin sat all day,
    Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love
    To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
    Come from the farthest steep of India,
    But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
    Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love,  
    To Theseus must be wedded, and you come
    To give their bed joy and prosperity?
  OBERON. How canst thou thus, for shame, Titania,
    Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
    Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
    Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night
    From Perigouna, whom he ravished?
    And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
    With Ariadne and Antiopa?
  TITANIA. These are the forgeries of jealousy;
    And never, since the middle summer's spring,
    Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
    By paved fountain, or by rushy brook,
    Or in the beached margent of the sea,
    To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
    But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport.
    Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
    As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea
    Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,
    Hath every pelting river made so proud  
    That they have overborne their continents.
    The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain,
    The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
    Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard;
    The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
    And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;
    The nine men's morris is fill'd up with mud,
    And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
    For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
    The human mortals want their winter here;
    No night is now with hymn or carol blest;
    Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
    Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
    That rheumatic diseases do abound.
    And thorough this distemperature we see
    The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
    Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose;
    And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown
    An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
    Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,  
    The childing autumn, angry winter, change
    Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,
    By their increase, now knows not which is which.
    And this same progeny of evils comes
    From our debate, from our dissension;
    We are their parents and original.
  OBERON. Do you amend it, then; it lies in you.
    Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
    I do but beg a little changeling boy
    To be my henchman.
  TITANIA. Set your heart at rest;
    The fairy land buys not the child of me.
    His mother was a vot'ress of my order;
    And, in the spiced Indian air, by night,
    Full often hath she gossip'd by my side;
    And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,
    Marking th' embarked traders on the flood;
    When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive,
    And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
    Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait  
    Following- her womb then rich with my young squire-
    Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
    To fetch me trifles, and return again,
    As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
    But she, being mortal, of that boy did die;
    And for her sake do I rear up her boy;
    And for her sake I will not part with him.
  OBERON. How long within this wood intend you stay?
  TITANIA. Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day.
    If you will patiently dance in our round,
    And see our moonlight revels, go with us;
    If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.
  OBERON. Give me that boy and I will go with thee.
  TITANIA. Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
    We shall chide downright if I longer stay.
                                     Exit TITANIA with her train
  OBERON. Well, go thy way; thou shalt not from this grove
    Till I torment thee for this injury.
    My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb'rest
    Since once I sat upon a promontory,  
    And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back
    Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
    That the rude sea grew civil at her song,
    And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
    To hear the sea-maid's music.
  PUCK. I remember.
  OBERON. That very time I saw, but thou couldst not,
    Flying between the cold moon and the earth
    Cupid, all arm'd; a certain aim he took
    At a fair vestal, throned by the west,
    And loos'd his love-shaft smartly from his bow,
    As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts;
    But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
    Quench'd in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon;
    And the imperial vot'ress passed on,
    In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
    Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell.
    It fell upon a little western flower,
    Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound,
    And maidens call it Love-in-idleness.  
    Fetch me that flow'r, the herb I showed thee once.
    The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
    Will make or man or woman madly dote
    Upon the next live creature that it sees.
    Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
    Ere the leviathan can swim a league.
  PUCK. I'll put a girdle round about the earth
    In forty minutes.                                  Exit PUCK
  OBERON. Having once this juice,
    I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,
    And drop the liquor of it in her eyes;
    The next thing then she waking looks upon,
    Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
    On meddling monkey, or on busy ape,
    She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
    And ere I take this charm from off her sight,
    As I can take it with another herb,
    I'll make her render up her page to me.
    But who comes here? I am invisible;
    And I will overhear their conference.  

               Enter DEMETRIUS, HELENA following him

  DEMETRIUS. I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
    Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
    The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.
    Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood,
    And here am I, and wood within this wood,
    Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
    Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
  HELENA. You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant;
    But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
    Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
    And I shall have no power to follow you.
  DEMETRIUS. Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
    Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth
    Tell you I do not nor I cannot love you?
  HELENA. And even for that do I love you the more.
    I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,
    The more you beat me, I will fawn on you.  
    Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,
    Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,
    Unworthy as I am, to follow you.
    What worser place can I beg in your love,
    And yet a place of high respect with me,
    Than to be used as you use your dog?
  DEMETRIUS. Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
    For I am sick when I do look on thee.
  HELENA. And I am sick when I look not on you.
  DEMETRIUS. You do impeach your modesty too much
    To leave the city and commit yourself
    Into the hands of one that loves you not;
    To trust the opportunity of night,
    And the ill counsel of a desert place,
    With the rich worth of your virginity.
  HELENA. Your virtue is my privilege for that:
    It is not night when I do see your face,
    Therefore I think I am not in the night;
    Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
    For you, in my respect, are all the world.  
    Then how can it be said I am alone
    When all the world is here to look on me?
  DEMETRIUS. I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
    And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
  HELENA. The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
    Run when you will; the story shall be chang'd:
    Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;
    The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind
    Makes speed to catch the tiger- bootless speed,
    When cowardice pursues and valour flies.
  DEMETRIUS. I will not stay thy questions; let me go;
    Or, if thou follow me, do not believe
    But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
  HELENA. Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
    You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
    Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
    We cannot fight for love as men may do;
    We should be woo'd, and were not made to woo.
                                                  Exit DEMETRIUS
    I'll follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,  
    To die upon the hand I love so well.             Exit HELENA
  OBERON. Fare thee well, nymph; ere he do leave this grove,
    Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.

                            Re-enter PUCK

    Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
  PUCK. Ay, there it is.
  OBERON. I pray thee give it me.
    I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
    Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
    Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
    With sweet musk-roses, and with eglantine;
    There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
    Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight;
    And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin,
    Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in;
    And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes,
    And make her full of hateful fantasies.
    Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:  
    A sweet Athenian lady is in love
    With a disdainful youth; anoint his eyes;
    But do it when the next thing he espies
    May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
    By the Athenian garments he hath on.
    Effect it with some care, that he may prove
    More fond on her than she upon her love.
    And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
  PUCK. Fear not, my lord; your servant shall do so.      Exeunt




SCENE II.
Another part of the wood

Enter TITANIA, with her train

  TITANIA. Come now, a roundel and a fairy song;
    Then, for the third part of a minute, hence:
    Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds;
    Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,
    To make my small elves coats; and some keep back
    The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
    At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;
    Then to your offices, and let me rest.

                          The FAIRIES Sing

  FIRST FAIRY. You spotted snakes with double tongue,
               Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
               Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong,
               Come not near our fairy Queen.
  CHORUS.      Philomel with melody
               Sing in our sweet lullaby.  
               Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby.
               Never harm
               Nor spell nor charm
               Come our lovely lady nigh.
               So good night, with lullaby.
  SECOND FAIRY.  Weaving spiders, come not here;
                 Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence.
                 Beetles black, approach not near;
                 Worm nor snail do no offence.
  CHORUS.      Philomel with melody, etc.       [TITANIA Sleeps]
  FIRST FAIRY. Hence away; now all is well.
               One aloof stand sentinel.          Exeunt FAIRIES

      Enter OBERON and squeezes the flower on TITANIA'S eyelids

  OBERON. What thou seest when thou dost wake,
    Do it for thy true-love take;
    Love and languish for his sake.
    Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
    Pard, or boar with bristled hair,  
    In thy eye that shall appear
    When thou wak'st, it is thy dear.
    Wake when some vile thing is near.                      Exit

                     Enter LYSANDER and HERMIA

  LYSANDER. Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood;
    And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way;
    We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
    And tarry for the comfort of the day.
  HERMIA. Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed,
    For I upon this bank will rest my head.
  LYSANDER. One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
    One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
  HERMIA. Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear,
    Lie further off yet; do not lie so near.
  LYSANDER. O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
    Love takes the meaning in love's conference.
    I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
    So that but one heart we can make of it;  
    Two bosoms interchained with an oath,
    So then two bosoms and a single troth.
    Then by your side no bed-room me deny,
    For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.
  HERMIA. Lysander riddles very prettily.
    Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
    If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied!
    But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy
    Lie further off, in human modesty;
    Such separation as may well be said
    Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
    So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend.
    Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!
  LYSANDER. Amen, amen, to that fair prayer say I;
    And then end life when I end loyalty!
    Here is my bed; sleep give thee all his rest!
  HERMIA. With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd!
                                                    [They sleep]

                          Enter PUCK  

  PUCK.      Through the forest have I gone,
             But Athenian found I none
             On whose eyes I might approve
             This flower's force in stirring love.
             Night and silence- Who is here?
             Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
             This is he, my master said,
             Despised the Athenian maid;
             And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
             On the dank and dirty ground.
             Pretty soul! she durst not lie
             Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
             Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
             All the power this charm doth owe:
             When thou wak'st let love forbid
             Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
             So awake when I am gone;
             For I must now to Oberon.                      Exit
  
               Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running

  HELENA. Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
  DEMETRIUS. I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
  HELENA. O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.
  DEMETRIUS. Stay on thy peril; I alone will go.            Exit
  HELENA. O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!
    The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
    Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies,
    For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
    How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears;
    If so, my eyes are oft'ner wash'd than hers.
    No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
    For beasts that meet me run away for fear;
    Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
    Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus.
    What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
    Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne?
    But who is here? Lysander! on the ground!
    Dead, or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.  
    Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.
  LYSANDER. [Waking] And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
    Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
    That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
    Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
    Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
  HELENA. Do not say so, Lysander; say not so.
    What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?
    Yet Hermia still loves you; then be content.
  LYSANDER. Content with Hermia! No: I do repent
    The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
    Not Hermia but Helena I love:
    Who will not change a raven for a dove?
    The will of man is by his reason sway'd,
    And reason says you are the worthier maid.
    Things growing are not ripe until their season;
    So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason;
    And touching now the point of human skill,
    Reason becomes the marshal to my will,
    And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook  
    Love's stories, written in Love's richest book.
  HELENA. Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
    When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
    Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man,
    That I did never, no, nor never can,
    Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,
    But you must flout my insufficiency?
    Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
    In such disdainful manner me to woo.
    But fare you well; perforce I must confess
    I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
    O, that a lady of one man refus'd
    Should of another therefore be abus'd!                  Exit
  LYSANDER. She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there;
    And never mayst thou come Lysander near!
    For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
    The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
    Or as the heresies that men do leave
    Are hated most of those they did deceive,
    So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,  
    Of all be hated, but the most of me!
    And, all my powers, address your love and might
    To honour Helen, and to be her knight!                  Exit
  HERMIA. [Starting] Help me, Lysander, help me; do thy best
    To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.
    Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
    Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
    Methought a serpent eat my heart away,
    And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
    Lysander! What, remov'd? Lysander! lord!
    What, out of hearing gone? No sound, no word?
    Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear;
    Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
    No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
    Either death or you I'll find immediately.              Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
The wood. TITANIA lying asleep

Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING

  BOTTOM. Are we all met?
  QUINCE. Pat, pat; and here's a marvellous convenient place for our
    rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn
    brake our tiring-house; and we will do it in action, as we will
    do it before the Duke.
  BOTTOM. Peter Quince!
  QUINCE. What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
  BOTTOM. There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisby that
    will never please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill
    himself; which the ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?
  SNOUT. By'r lakin, a parlous fear.
  STARVELING. I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is
    done.
  BOTTOM. Not a whit; I have a device to make all well. Write me a
    prologue; and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm
    with our swords, and that Pyramus is not kill'd indeed; and for  
    the more better assurance, tell them that I Pyramus am not
    Pyramus but Bottom the weaver. This will put them out of fear.
  QUINCE. Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be written
    in eight and six.
  BOTTOM. No, make it two more; let it be written in eight and eight.
  SNOUT. Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
  STARVELING. I fear it, I promise you.
  BOTTOM. Masters, you ought to consider with yourself to bring in-
    God shield us!- a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing; for
    there is not a more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living; and
    we ought to look to't.
  SNOUT. Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.
  BOTTOM. Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen
    through the lion's neck; and he himself must speak through,
    saying thus, or to the same defect: 'Ladies,' or 'Fair ladies, I
    would wish you' or 'I would request you' or 'I would entreat you
    not to fear, not to tremble. My life for yours! If you think I
    come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. No, I am no such
    thing; I am a man as other men are.' And there, indeed, let him
    name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.  
  QUINCE. Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things- that
    is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber; for, you know, Pyramus
    and Thisby meet by moonlight.
  SNOUT. Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
  BOTTOM. A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanack; find out
    moonshine, find out moonshine.
  QUINCE. Yes, it doth shine that night.
  BOTTOM. Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber
    window, where we play, open; and the moon may shine in at the
    casement.
  QUINCE. Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a
    lantern, and say he comes to disfigure or to present the person
    of Moonshine. Then there is another thing: we must have a wall in
    the great chamber; for Pyramus and Thisby, says the story, did
    talk through the chink of a wall.
  SNOUT. You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?
  BOTTOM. Some man or other must present Wall; and let him have some
    plaster, or some loam, or some rough-cast about him, to signify
    wall; and let him hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny
    shall Pyramus and Thisby whisper.  
  QUINCE. If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every
    mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin; when
    you have spoken your speech, enter into that brake; and so every
    one according to his cue.

                          Enter PUCK behind

  PUCK. What hempen homespuns have we swagg'ring here,
    So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
    What, a play toward! I'll be an auditor;
    An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.
  QUINCE. Speak, Pyramus. Thisby, stand forth.
  BOTTOM. Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet-
  QUINCE. 'Odious'- odorous!
  BOTTOM. -odours savours sweet;
    So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear.
    But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
    And by and by I will to thee appear.                    Exit
  PUCK. A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here!           Exit
  FLUTE. Must I speak now?  
  QUINCE. Ay, marry, must you; for you must understand he goes but to
    see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.
  FLUTE. Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
    Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
    Most brisky juvenal, and eke most lovely Jew,
    As true as truest horse, that would never tire,
    I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.
  QUINCE. 'Ninus' tomb,' man! Why, you must not speak that yet; that
    you answer to Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues, and
    all. Pyramus enter: your cue is past; it is 'never tire.'
  FLUTE. O- As true as truest horse, that y et would never tire.

            Re-enter PUCK, and BOTTOM with an ass's head

  BOTTOM. If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine.
  QUINCE. O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters! fly,
    masters! Help!
                                  Exeunt all but BOTTOM and PUCK
  PUCK. I'll follow you; I'll lead you about a round,
    Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier;  
    Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
    A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
    And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
    Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
Exit
  BOTTOM. Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make me
    afeard.

                          Re-enter SNOUT

  SNOUT. O Bottom, thou art chang'd! What do I see on thee?
  BOTTOM. What do you see? You see an ass-head of your own, do you?
                                                      Exit SNOUT

                          Re-enter QUINCE

  QUINCE. Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art translated.
 Exit
  BOTTOM. I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me; to
    fright me, if they could. But I will not stir from this place, do  
    what they can; I will walk up and down here, and will sing, that
    they shall hear I am not afraid.                     [Sings]

          The ousel cock, so black of hue,
            With orange-tawny bill,
          The throstle with his note so true,
            The wren with little quill.

  TITANIA. What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed?
  BOTTOM. [Sings]
          The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
            The plain-song cuckoo grey,
          Whose note full many a man doth mark,
            And dares not answer nay-
    for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird?
    Who would give a bird the he, though he cry 'cuckoo' never so?
  TITANIA. I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
    Mine ear is much enamoured of thy note;
    So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape;
    And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me,  
    On the first view, to say, to swear, I love thee.
  BOTTOM. Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that.
    And yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep little company
    together now-a-days. The more the pity that some honest
    neighbours will not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon
    occasion.
  TITANIA. Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
  BOTTOM. Not so, neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of this
    wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.
  TITANIA. Out of this wood do not desire to go;
    Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
    I am a spirit of no common rate;
    The summer still doth tend upon my state;
    And I do love thee; therefore, go with me.
    I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee;
    And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
    And sing, while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep;
    And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
    That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.
    Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed!  

       Enter PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH, and MUSTARDSEED

  PEASEBLOSSOM. Ready.
  COBWEB. And I.
  MOTH. And I.
  MUSTARDSEED. And I.
  ALL. Where shall we go?
  TITANIA. Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;
    Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
    Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
    With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
    The honey bags steal from the humble-bees,
    And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs,
    And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,
    To have my love to bed and to arise;
    And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,
    To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
    Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Hail, mortal!  
  COBWEB. Hail!
  MOTH. Hail!
  MUSTARDSEED. Hail!
  BOTTOM. I cry your worships mercy, heartily; I beseech your
    worship's name.
  COBWEB. Cobweb.
  BOTTOM. I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master
    Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you. Your
    name, honest gentleman?
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Peaseblossom.
  BOTTOM. I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and
    to Master Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall
    desire you of more acquaintance too. Your name, I beseech you,
    sir?
  MUSTARDSEED. Mustardseed.
  BOTTOM. Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well. That
    same cowardly giant-like ox-beef hath devour'd many a gentleman
    of your house. I promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water
    ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance, good Master
    Mustardseed.  
  TITANIA. Come, wait upon him; lead him to my bower.
    The moon, methinks, looks with a wat'ry eye;
    And when she weeps, weeps every little flower;
    Lamenting some enforced chastity.
    Tie up my love's tongue, bring him silently.          Exeunt




SCENE II.
Another part of the wood

Enter OBERON

  OBERON. I wonder if Titania be awak'd;
    Then, what it was that next came in her eye,
    Which she must dote on in extremity.

                          Enter PUCK

    Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit!
    What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
  PUCK. My mistress with a monster is in love.
    Near to her close and consecrated bower,
    While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
    A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
    That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
    Were met together to rehearse a play
    Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.
    The shallowest thickskin of that barren sort,
    Who Pyramus presented, in their sport
    Forsook his scene and ent'red in a brake;  
    When I did him at this advantage take,
    An ass's nole I fixed on his head.
    Anon his Thisby must be answered,
    And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
    As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
    Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
    Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
    Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
    So at his sight away his fellows fly;
    And at our stamp here, o'er and o'er one falls;
    He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
    Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,
    Made senseless things begin to do them wrong,
    For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
    Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.
    I led them on in this distracted fear,
    And left sweet Pyramus translated there;
    When in that moment, so it came to pass,
    Titania wak'd, and straightway lov'd an ass.
  OBERON. This falls out better than I could devise.  
    But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes
    With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?
  PUCK. I took him sleeping- that is finish'd too-
    And the Athenian woman by his side;
    That, when he wak'd, of force she must be ey'd.

                 Enter DEMETRIUS and HERMIA

  OBERON. Stand close; this is the same Athenian.
  PUCK. This is the woman, but not this the man.
  DEMETRIUS. O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
    Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
  HERMIA. Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
    For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
    If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
    Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
    And kill me too.
    The sun was not so true unto the day
    As he to me. Would he have stolen away
    From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon  
    This whole earth may be bor'd, and that the moon
    May through the centre creep and so displease
    Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes.
    It cannot be but thou hast murd'red him;
    So should a murderer look- so dead, so grim.
  DEMETRIUS. So should the murdered look; and so should I,
    Pierc'd through the heart with your stern cruelty;
    Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
    As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
  HERMIA. What's this to my Lysander? Where is he?
    Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
  DEMETRIUS. I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
  HERMIA. Out, dog! out, cur! Thou driv'st me past the bounds
    Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
    Henceforth be never numb'red among men!
    O, once tell true; tell true, even for my sake!
    Durst thou have look'd upon him being awake,
    And hast thou kill'd him sleeping? O brave touch!
    Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
    An adder did it; for with doubler tongue  
    Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
  DEMETRIUS. You spend your passion on a mispris'd mood:
    I am not guilty of Lysander's blood;
    Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
  HERMIA. I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
  DEMETRIUS. An if I could, what should I get therefore?
  HERMIA. A privilege never to see me more.
    And from thy hated presence part I so;
    See me no more whether he be dead or no.                Exit
  DEMETRIUS. There is no following her in this fierce vein;
    Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
    So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow
    For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe;
    Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
    If for his tender here I make some stay.         [Lies down]
  OBERON. What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite,
    And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight.
    Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
    Some true love turn'd, and not a false turn'd true.
  PUCK. Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth,  
    A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
  OBERON. About the wood go swifter than the wind,
    And Helena of Athens look thou find;
    All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer,
    With sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.
    By some illusion see thou bring her here;
    I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.
  PUCK. I go, I go; look how I go,
    Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.               Exit
  OBERON.       Flower of this purple dye,
                Hit with Cupid's archery,
                Sink in apple of his eye.
                When his love he doth espy,
                Let her shine as gloriously
                As the Venus of the sky.
                When thou wak'st, if she be by,
                Beg of her for remedy.

                       Re-enter PUCK
  
  PUCK.         Captain of our fairy band,
                Helena is here at hand,
                And the youth mistook by me
                Pleading for a lover's fee;
                Shall we their fond pageant see?
                Lord, what fools these mortals be!
  OBERON.       Stand aside. The noise they make
                Will cause Demetrius to awake.
  PUCK.         Then will two at once woo one.
                That must needs be sport alone;
                And those things do best please me
                That befall prepost'rously.

                   Enter LYSANDER and HELENA

  LYSANDER. Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
    Scorn and derision never come in tears.
    Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
    In their nativity all truth appears.
    How can these things in me seem scorn to you,  
    Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?
  HELENA. You do advance your cunning more and more.
    When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
    These vows are Hermia's. Will you give her o'er?
    Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:
    Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
    Will even weigh; and both as light as tales.
  LYSANDER. I hod no judgment when to her I swore.
  HELENA. Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.
  LYSANDER. Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
  DEMETRIUS. [Awaking] O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
    To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
    Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
    Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
    That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,
    Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
    When thou hold'st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
    This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
  HELENA. O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
    To set against me for your merriment.  
    If you were civil and knew courtesy,
    You would not do me thus much injury.
    Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
    But you must join in souls to mock me too?
    If you were men, as men you are in show,
    You would not use a gentle lady so:
    To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
    When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.
    You both are rivals, and love Hermia;
    And now both rivals, to mock Helena.
    A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
    To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes
    With your derision! None of noble sort
    Would so offend a virgin, and extort
    A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.
  LYSANDER. You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so;
    For you love Hermia. This you know I know;
    And here, with all good will, with all my heart,
    In Hermia's love I yield you up my part;
    And yours of Helena to me bequeath,  
    Whom I do love and will do till my death.
  HELENA. Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
  DEMETRIUS. Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none.
    If e'er I lov'd her, all that love is gone.
    My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd,
    And now to Helen is it home return'd,
    There to remain.
  LYSANDER. Helen, it is not so.
  DEMETRIUS. Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
    Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear.
    Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.

                       Enter HERMIA

  HERMIA. Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
    The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
    Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
    It pays the hearing double recompense.
    Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
    Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.  
    But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
  LYSANDER. Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?
  HERMIA. What love could press Lysander from my side?
  LYSANDER. Lysander's love, that would not let him bide-
    Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
    Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
    Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee know
    The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so?
  HERMIA. You speak not as you think; it cannot be.
  HELENA. Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
    Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three
    To fashion this false sport in spite of me.
    Injurious Hermia! most ungrateful maid!
    Have you conspir'd, have you with these contriv'd,
    To bait me with this foul derision?
    Is all the counsel that we two have shar'd,
    The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent,
    When we have chid the hasty-footed time
    For parting us- O, is all forgot?
    All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence?  
    We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
    Have with our needles created both one flower,
    Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
    Both warbling of one song, both in one key;
    As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds,
    Had been incorporate. So we grew together,
    Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
    But yet an union in partition,
    Two lovely berries moulded on one stern;
    So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;
    Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
    Due but to one, and crowned with one crest.
    And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
    To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
    It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly;
    Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
    Though I alone do feel the injury.
  HERMIA. I am amazed at your passionate words;
    I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me.
  HELENA. Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,  
    To follow me and praise my eyes and face?
    And made your other love, Demetrius,
    Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
    To call me goddess, nymph, divine, and rare,
    Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
    To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
    Deny your love, so rich within his soul,
    And tender me, forsooth, affection,
    But by your setting on, by your consent?
    What though I be not so in grace as you,
    So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
    But miserable most, to love unlov'd?
    This you should pity rather than despise.
  HERMIA. I understand not what you mean by this.
  HELENA. Ay, do- persever, counterfeit sad looks,
    Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
    Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up;
    This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
    If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
    You would not make me such an argument.  
    But fare ye well; 'tis partly my own fault,
    Which death, or absence, soon shall remedy.
  LYSANDER. Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse;
    My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!
  HELENA. O excellent!
  HERMIA. Sweet, do not scorn her so.
  DEMETRIUS. If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
  LYSANDER. Thou canst compel no more than she entreat;
    Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers
    Helen, I love thee, by my life I do;
    I swear by that which I will lose for thee
    To prove him false that says I love thee not.
  DEMETRIUS. I say I love thee more than he can do.
  LYSANDER. If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.
  DEMETRIUS. Quick, come.
  HERMIA. Lysander, whereto tends all this?
  LYSANDER. Away, you Ethiope!
  DEMETRIUS. No, no, he will
    Seem to break loose- take on as you would follow,
    But yet come not. You are a tame man; go!  
  LYSANDER. Hang off, thou cat, thou burr; vile thing, let loose,
    Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
  HERMIA. Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
    Sweet love?
  LYSANDER. Thy love! Out, tawny Tartar, out!
    Out, loathed med'cine! O hated potion, hence!
  HERMIA. Do you not jest?
  HELENA. Yes, sooth; and so do you.
  LYSANDER. Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
  DEMETRIUS. I would I had your bond; for I perceive
    A weak bond holds you; I'll not trust your word.
  LYSANDER. What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
    Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.
  HERMIA. What! Can you do me greater harm than hate?
    Hate me! wherefore? O me! what news, my love?
    Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
    I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
    Since night you lov'd me; yet since night you left me.
    Why then, you left me- O, the gods forbid!-
    In earnest, shall I say?  
  LYSANDER. Ay, by my life!
    And never did desire to see thee more.
    Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt;
    Be certain, nothing truer; 'tis no jest
    That I do hate thee and love Helena.
  HERMIA. O me! you juggler! you cankerblossom!
    You thief of love! What! Have you come by night,
    And stol'n my love's heart from him?
  HELENA. Fine, i' faith!
    Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
    No touch of bashfulness? What! Will you tear
    Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
    Fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet you!
  HERMIA. 'Puppet!' why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
    Now I perceive that she hath made compare
    Between our statures; she hath urg'd her height;
    And with her personage, her tall personage,
    Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him.
    And are you grown so high in his esteem
    Because I am so dwarfish and so low?  
    How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak.
    How low am I? I am not yet so low
    But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
  HELENA. I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
    Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
    I have no gift at all in shrewishness;
    I am a right maid for my cowardice;
    Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
    Because she is something lower than myself,
    That I can match her.
  HERMIA. 'Lower' hark, again.
  HELENA. Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
    I evermore did love you, Hermia,
    Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong'd you;
    Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
    I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
    He followed you; for love I followed him;
    But he hath chid me hence, and threat'ned me
    To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too;
    And now, so you will let me quiet go,  
    To Athens will I bear my folly back,
    And follow you no further. Let me go.
    You see how simple and how fond I am.
  HERMIA. Why, get you gone! Who is't that hinders you?
  HELENA. A foolish heart that I leave here behind.
  HERMIA. What! with Lysander?
  HELENA. With Demetrius.
  LYSANDER. Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.
  DEMETRIUS. No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
  HELENA. O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd;
    She was a vixen when she went to school;
    And, though she be but little, she is fierce.
  HERMIA. 'Little' again! Nothing but 'low' and 'little'!
    Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
    Let me come to her.
  LYSANDER. Get you gone, you dwarf;
    You minimus, of hind'ring knot-grass made;
    You bead, you acorn.
  DEMETRIUS. You are too officious
    In her behalf that scorns your services.  
    Let her alone; speak not of Helena;
    Take not her part; for if thou dost intend
    Never so little show of love to her,
    Thou shalt aby it.
  LYSANDER. Now she holds me not.
    Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right,
    Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
  DEMETRIUS. Follow! Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
                                   Exeunt LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS
  HERMIA. You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
    Nay, go not back.
  HELENA. I will not trust you, I;
    Nor longer stay in your curst company.
    Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray;
    My legs are longer though, to run away.                 Exit
  HERMIA. I am amaz'd, and know not what to say.            Exit
  OBERON. This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak'st,
    Or else committ'st thy knaveries wilfully.
  PUCK. Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
    Did not you tell me I should know the man  
    By the Athenian garments he had on?
    And so far blameless proves my enterprise
    That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
    And so far am I glad it so did sort,
    As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
  OBERON. Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
    Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
    The starry welkin cover thou anon
    With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
    And lead these testy rivals so astray
    As one come not within another's way.
    Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
    Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;
    And sometime rail thou like Demetrius;
    And from each other look thou lead them thus,
    Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
    With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
    Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye;
    Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
    To take from thence all error with his might  
    And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
    When they next wake, all this derision
    Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision;
    And back to Athens shall the lovers wend
    With league whose date till death shall never end.
    Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
    I'll to my queen, and beg her Indian boy;
    And then I will her charmed eye release
    From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.
  PUCK. My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
    For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;
    And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,
    At whose approach ghosts, wand'ring here and there,
    Troop home to churchyards. Damned spirits all
    That in cross-ways and floods have burial,
    Already to their wormy beds are gone,
    For fear lest day should look their shames upon;
    They wilfully themselves exil'd from light,
    And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night.
  OBERON. But we are spirits of another sort:  
    I with the Morning's love have oft made sport;
    And, like a forester, the groves may tread
    Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,
    Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
    Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.
    But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay;
    We may effect this business yet ere day.         Exit OBERON
  PUCK.      Up and down, up and down,
             I will lead them up and down.
             I am fear'd in field and town.
             Goblin, lead them up and down.
    Here comes one.

                      Enter LYSANDER

  LYSANDER. Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.
  PUCK. Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?
  LYSANDER. I will be with thee straight.
  PUCK. Follow me, then,
    To plainer ground.      Exit LYSANDER as following the voice  

                      Enter DEMETRIUS

  DEMETRIUS. Lysander, speak again.
    Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
    Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?
  PUCK. Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
    Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
    And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child;
    I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defil'd
    That draws a sword on thee.
  DEMETRIUS. Yea, art thou there?
  PUCK. Follow my voice; we'll try no manhood here.       Exeunt

                      Re-enter LYSANDER

  LYSANDER. He goes before me, and still dares me on;
    When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
    The villain is much lighter heel'd than I.
    I followed fast, but faster he did fly,  
    That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
    And here will rest me. [Lies down] Come, thou gentle day.
    For if but once thou show me thy grey light,
    I'll find Demetrius, and revenge this spite.        [Sleeps]

                 Re-enter PUCK and DEMETRIUS

  PUCK. Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not?
  DEMETRIUS. Abide me, if thou dar'st; for well I wot
    Thou run'st before me, shifting every place,
    And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face.
    Where art thou now?
  PUCK. Come hither; I am here.
  DEMETRIUS. Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this dear,
    If ever I thy face by daylight see;
    Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
    To measure out my length on this cold bed.
    By day's approach look to be visited.
                                          [Lies down and sleeps]
  
                       Enter HELENA

  HELENA. O weary night, O long and tedious night,
    Abate thy hours! Shine comforts from the east,
    That I may back to Athens by daylight,
    From these that my poor company detest.
    And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
    Steal me awhile from mine own company.              [Sleeps]
  PUCK.       Yet but three? Come one more;
              Two of both kinds makes up four.
              Here she comes, curst and sad.
              Cupid is a knavish lad,
              Thus to make poor females mad.

                     Enter HERMIA

  HERMIA. Never so weary, never so in woe,
    Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briers,
    I can no further crawl, no further go;
    My legs can keep no pace with my desires.  
    Here will I rest me till the break of day.
    Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!
                                          [Lies down and sleeps]
  PUCK.          On the ground
                 Sleep sound;
                 I'll apply
                 To your eye,
          Gentle lover, remedy.
                        [Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER'S eyes]
                 When thou wak'st,
                 Thou tak'st
                 True delight
                 In the sight
          Of thy former lady's eye;
          And the country proverb known,
          That every man should take his own,
          In your waking shall be shown:
                 Jack shall have Jill;
                 Nought shall go ill;
    The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.  
 Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
The wood. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA, lying asleep

Enter TITANIA and Bottom; PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH, MUSTARDSEED,
and other FAIRIES attending;
                      OBERON behind, unseen

  TITANIA. Come, sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed,
    While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
    And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,
    And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
  BOTTOM. Where's Peaseblossom?
  PEASEBLOSSOM. Ready.
  BOTTOM. Scratch my head, Peaseblossom.
    Where's Mounsieur Cobweb?
  COBWEB. Ready.
  BOTTOM. Mounsieur Cobweb; good mounsieur, get you your weapons in
    your hand and kill me a red-hipp'd humble-bee on the top of a
    thistle; and, good mounsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret
    yourself too much in the action, mounsieur; and, good mounsieur,
    have a care the honey-bag break not; I would be loath to have you  
    overflown with a honey-bag, signior. Where's Mounsieur
    Mustardseed?
  MUSTARDSEED. Ready.
  BOTTOM. Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed. Pray you, leave
    your curtsy, good mounsieur.
  MUSTARDSEED. What's your will?
  BOTTOM. Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to
    scratch. I must to the barber's, mounsieur; for methinks I am
    marvellous hairy about the face; and I am such a tender ass, if
    my hair do but tickle me I must scratch.
  TITANIA. What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?
  BOTTOM. I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's have the tongs
    and the bones.
  TITANIA. Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
  BOTTOM. Truly, a peck of provender; I could munch your good dry
    oats. Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay. Good
    hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.
  TITANIA. I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
    The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.
  BOTTOM. I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But, I  
    pray you, let none of your people stir me; I have an exposition
    of sleep come upon me.
  TITANIA. Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
    Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.       Exeunt FAIRIES
    So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
    Gently entwist; the female ivy so
    Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
    O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!         [They sleep]

                         Enter PUCK

  OBERON. [Advancing] Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet
      sight?
    Her dotage now I do begin to pity;
    For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
    Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool,
    I did upbraid her and fall out with her.
    For she his hairy temples then had rounded
    With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
    And that same dew which sometime on the buds  
    Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls
    Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes,
    Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
    When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
    And she in mild terms begg'd my patience,
    I then did ask of her her changeling child;
    Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
    To bear him to my bower in fairy land.
    And now I have the boy, I will undo
    This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
    And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
    From off the head of this Athenian swain,
    That he awaking when the other do
    May all to Athens back again repair,
    And think no more of this night's accidents
    But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
    But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
                                             [Touching her eyes]
           Be as thou wast wont to be;
           See as thou was wont to see.  
           Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower
           Hath such force and blessed power.
    Now, my Titania; wake you, my sweet queen.
  TITANIA. My Oberon! What visions have I seen!
    Methought I was enamour'd of an ass.
  OBERON. There lies your love.
  TITANIA. How came these things to pass?
    O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
  OBERON. Silence awhile. Robin, take off this head.
    Titania, music call; and strike more dead
    Than common sleep of all these five the sense.
  TITANIA. Music, ho, music, such as charmeth sleep!
  PUCK. Now when thou wak'st with thine own fool's eyes peep.
  OBERON. Sound, music. Come, my Queen, take hands with me,
                                                         [Music]
    And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
    Now thou and I are new in amity,
    And will to-morrow midnight solemnly
    Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,
    And bless it to all fair prosperity.  
    There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
    Wedded, with Theseus, an in jollity.
  PUCK.       Fairy King, attend and mark;
              I do hear the morning lark.
  OBERON.     Then, my Queen, in silence sad,
              Trip we after night's shade.
              We the globe can compass soon,
              Swifter than the wand'ring moon.
  TITANIA.    Come, my lord; and in our flight,
              Tell me how it came this night
              That I sleeping here was found
              With these mortals on the ground.           Exeunt

        To the winding of horns, enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA,
                      EGEUS, and train

  THESEUS. Go, one of you, find out the forester;
    For now our observation is perform'd,
    And since we have the vaward of the day,
    My love shall hear the music of my hounds.  
    Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
    Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.    Exit an ATTENDANT
    We will, fair Queen, up to the mountain's top,
    And mark the musical confusion
    Of hounds and echo in conjunction.
  HIPPOLYTA. I was with Hercules and Cadmus once
    When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear
    With hounds of Sparta; never did I hear
    Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,
    The skies, the fountains, every region near
    Seem'd all one mutual cry. I never heard
    So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
  THESEUS. My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
    So flew'd, so sanded; and their heads are hung
    With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
    Crook-knee'd and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls;
    Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells,
    Each under each. A cry more tuneable
    Was never holla'd to, nor cheer'd with horn,
    In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.  
    Judge when you hear. But, soft, what nymphs are these?
  EGEUS. My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
    And this Lysander, this Demetrius is,
    This Helena, old Nedar's Helena.
    I wonder of their being here together.
  THESEUS. No doubt they rose up early to observe
    The rite of May; and, hearing our intent,
    Came here in grace of our solemnity.
    But speak, Egeus; is not this the day
    That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
  EGEUS. It is, my lord.
  THESEUS. Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
                           [Horns and shout within. The sleepers
                                     awake and kneel to THESEUS]
    Good-morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past;
    Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?
  LYSANDER. Pardon, my lord.
  THESEUS. I pray you all, stand up.
    I know you two are rival enemies;
    How comes this gentle concord in the world  
    That hatred is so far from jealousy
    To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?
  LYSANDER. My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
    Half sleep, half waking; but as yet, I swear,
    I cannot truly say how I came here,
    But, as I think- for truly would I speak,
    And now I do bethink me, so it is-
    I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
    Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
    Without the peril of the Athenian law-
  EGEUS. Enough, enough, my Lord; you have enough;
    I beg the law, the law upon his head.
    They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius,
    Thereby to have defeated you and me:
    You of your wife, and me of my consent,
    Of my consent that she should be your wife.
  DEMETRIUS. My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
    Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
    And I in fury hither followed them,
    Fair Helena in fancy following me.  
    But, my good lord, I wot not by what power-
    But by some power it is- my love to Hermia,
    Melted as the snow, seems to me now
    As the remembrance of an idle gaud
    Which in my childhood I did dote upon;
    And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
    The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
    Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
    Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia.
    But, like a sickness, did I loathe this food;
    But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
    Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
    And will for evermore be true to it.
  THESEUS. Fair lovers, you are fortunately met;
    Of this discourse we more will hear anon.
    Egeus, I will overbear your will;
    For in the temple, by and by, with us
    These couples shall eternally be knit.
    And, for the morning now is something worn,
    Our purpos'd hunting shall be set aside.  
    Away with us to Athens, three and three;
    We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.
    Come, Hippolyta.
                     Exeunt THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, EGEUS, and train
  DEMETRIUS. These things seem small and undistinguishable,
    Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.
  HERMIA. Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
    When every thing seems double.
  HELENA. So methinks;
    And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
    Mine own, and not mine own.
  DEMETRIUS. Are you sure
    That we are awake? It seems to me
    That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
    The Duke was here, and bid us follow him?
  HERMIA. Yea, and my father.
  HELENA. And Hippolyta.
  LYSANDER. And he did bid us follow to the temple.
  DEMETRIUS. Why, then, we are awake; let's follow him;
    And by the way let us recount our dreams.             Exeunt  
  BOTTOM. [Awaking] When my cue comes, call me, and I will answer. My
    next is 'Most fair Pyramus.' Heigh-ho! Peter Quince! Flute, the
    bellows-mender! Snout, the tinker! Starveling! God's my life,
    stol'n hence, and left me asleep! I have had a most rare vision.
    I have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it was.
    Man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream. Methought
    I was- there is no man can tell what. Methought I was, and
    methought I had, but man is but a patch'd fool, if he will offer
    to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not heard, the
    ear of man hath not seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his
    tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was. I
    will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream. It shall
    be call'd 'Bottom's Dream,' because it hath no bottom; and I will
    sing it in the latter end of a play, before the Duke.
    Peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it at
    her death.                                              Exit




SCENE II.
Athens. QUINCE'S house

Enter QUINCE, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING

  QUINCE. Have you sent to Bottom's house? Is he come home yet?
  STARVELING. He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is transported.
  FLUTE. If he come not, then the play is marr'd; it goes not
    forward, doth it?
  QUINCE. It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able
    to discharge Pyramus but he.
  FLUTE. No; he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in
    Athens.
  QUINCE. Yea, and the best person too; and he is a very paramour for
    a sweet voice.
  FLUTE. You must say 'paragon.' A paramour is- God bless us!- A
    thing of naught.

                           Enter SNUG

  SNUG. Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple; and there is two
    or three lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone  
    forward, we had all been made men.
  FLUTE. O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day
    during his life; he could not have scaped sixpence a day. An the
    Duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I'll
    be hanged. He would have deserved it: sixpence a day in Pyramus,
    or nothing.

                           Enter BOTTOM

  BOTTOM. Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?
  QUINCE. Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!
  BOTTOM. Masters, I am to discourse wonders; but ask me not what;
    for if I tell you, I am not true Athenian. I will tell you
    everything, right as it fell out.
  QUINCE. Let us hear, sweet Bottom.
  BOTTOM. Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that the
    Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together; good strings to your
    beards, new ribbons to your pumps; meet presently at the palace;
    every man look o'er his part; for the short and the long is, our
    play is preferr'd. In any case, let Thisby have clean linen; and  
    let not him that plays the lion pare his nails, for they shall
    hang out for the lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no
    onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath; and I do not
    doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No more words.
    Away, go, away!                                       Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
Athens. The palace of THESEUS

Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, LORDS, and ATTENDANTS

  HIPPOLYTA. 'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.
  THESEUS. More strange than true. I never may believe
    These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.
    Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
    Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
    More than cool reason ever comprehends.
    The lunatic, the lover, and the poet,
    Are of imagination all compact.
    One sees more devils than vast hell can hold;
    That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
    Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.
    The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
    Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
    And as imagination bodies forth
    The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
    Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing  
    A local habitation and a name.
    Such tricks hath strong imagination
    That, if it would but apprehend some joy,
    It comprehends some bringer of that joy;
    Or in the night, imagining some fear,
    How easy is a bush suppos'd a bear?
  HIPPOLYTA. But all the story of the night told over,
    And all their minds transfigur'd so together,
    More witnesseth than fancy's images,
    And grows to something of great constancy,
    But howsoever strange and admirable.

          Enter LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HERMIA, and HELENA

  THESEUS. Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.
    Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love
    Accompany your hearts!
  LYSANDER. More than to us
    Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
  THESEUS. Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have,  
    To wear away this long age of three hours
    Between our after-supper and bed-time?
    Where is our usual manager of mirth?
    What revels are in hand? Is there no play
    To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
    Call Philostrate.
  PHILOSTRATE. Here, mighty Theseus.
  THESEUS. Say, what abridgment have you for this evening?
    What masque? what music? How shall we beguile
    The lazy time, if not with some delight?
  PHILOSTRATE. There is a brief how many sports are ripe;
    Make choice of which your Highness will see first.
                                                [Giving a paper]
  THESEUS. 'The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
    By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.'
    We'll none of that: that have I told my love,
    In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
    'The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
    Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.'
    That is an old device, and it was play'd  
    When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
    'The thrice three Muses mourning for the death
    Of Learning, late deceas'd in beggary.'
    That is some satire, keen and critical,
    Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
    'A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
    And his love Thisby; very tragical mirth.'
    Merry and tragical! tedious and brief!
    That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
    How shall we find the concord of this discord?
  PHILOSTRATE. A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
    Which is as brief as I have known a play;
    But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
    Which makes it tedious; for in all the play
    There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
    And tragical, my noble lord, it is;
    For Pyramus therein doth kill himself.
    Which when I saw rehears'd, I must confess,
    Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
    The passion of loud laughter never shed.  
  THESEUS. What are they that do play it?
  PHILOSTRATE. Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
    Which never labour'd in their minds till now;
    And now have toil'd their unbreathed memories
    With this same play against your nuptial.
  THESEUS. And we will hear it.
  PHILOSTRATE. No, my noble lord,
    It is not for you. I have heard it over,
    And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
    Unless you can find sport in their intents,
    Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain,
    To do you service.
  THESEUS. I will hear that play;
    For never anything can be amiss
    When simpleness and duty tender it.
    Go, bring them in; and take your places, ladies.
                                                Exit PHILOSTRATE
  HIPPOLYTA. I love not to see wretchedness o'er-charged,
    And duty in his service perishing.
  THESEUS. Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.  
  HIPPOLYTA. He says they can do nothing in this kind.
  THESEUS. The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
    Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;
    And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
    Takes it in might, not merit.
    Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
    To greet me with premeditated welcomes;
    Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
    Make periods in the midst of sentences,
    Throttle their practis'd accent in their fears,
    And, in conclusion, dumbly have broke off,
    Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
    Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome;
    And in the modesty of fearful duty
    I read as much as from the rattling tongue
    Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
    Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
    In least speak most to my capacity.

                       Re-enter PHILOSTRATE  

  PHILOSTRATE. SO please your Grace, the Prologue is address'd.
  THESEUS. Let him approach.              [Flourish of trumpets]

                 Enter QUINCE as the PROLOGUE

  PROLOGUE. If we offend, it is with our good will.
    That you should think, we come not to offend,
    But with good will. To show our simple skill,
    That is the true beginning of our end.
    Consider then, we come but in despite.
    We do not come, as minding to content you,
    Our true intent is. All for your delight
    We are not here. That you should here repent you,
    The actors are at band; and, by their show,
    You shall know all, that you are like to know,
  THESEUS. This fellow doth not stand upon points.
  LYSANDER. He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt; he knows not
    the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but
    to speak true.  
  HIPPOLYTA. Indeed he hath play'd on this prologue like a child on a
    recorder- a sound, but not in government.
  THESEUS. His speech was like a tangled chain; nothing im paired,
    but all disordered. Who is next?

          Enter, with a trumpet before them, as in dumb show,
            PYRAMUS and THISBY, WALL, MOONSHINE, and LION

  PROLOGUE. Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;
    But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
    This man is Pyramus, if you would know;
    This beauteous lady Thisby is certain.
    This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present
    Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder;
    And through Walls chink, poor souls, they are content
    To whisper. At the which let no man wonder.
    This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn,
    Presenteth Moonshine; for, if you will know,
    By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
    To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.  
    This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name,
    The trusty Thisby, coming first by night,
    Did scare away, or rather did affright;
    And as she fled, her mantle she did fall;
    Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
    Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
    And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain;
    Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
    He bravely broach'd his boiling bloody breast;
    And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,
    His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
    Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain,
    At large discourse while here they do remain.
                               Exeunt PROLOGUE, PYRAMUS, THISBY,
                                             LION, and MOONSHINE
  THESEUS. I wonder if the lion be to speak.
  DEMETRIUS. No wonder, my lord: one lion may, when many asses do.
  WALL. In this same interlude it doth befall
    That I, one Snout by name, present a wall;
    And such a wall as I would have you think  
    That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
    Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby,
    Did whisper often very secretly.
    This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone, doth show
    That I am that same wall; the truth is so;
    And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
    Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
  THESEUS. Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?
  DEMETRIUS. It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
    discourse, my lord.

                       Enter PYRAMUS

  THESEUS. Pyramus draws near the wall; silence.
  PYRAMUS. O grim-look'd night! O night with hue so black!
    O night, which ever art when day is not!
    O night, O night, alack, alack, alack,
    I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot!
    And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
    That stand'st between her father's ground and mine;  
    Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
    Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.
                                     [WALL holds up his fingers]
    Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for this!
    But what see what see I? No Thisby do I see.
    O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
    Curs'd he thy stones for thus deceiving me!
  THESEUS. The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.
  PYRAMUS. No, in truth, sir, he should not. Deceiving me is Thisby's
    cue. She is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall.
    You shall see it will fall pat as I told you; yonder she comes.

                          Enter THISBY

  THISBY. O wall, full often hast thou beard my moans,
    For parting my fair Pyramus and me!
    My cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones,
    Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.
  PYRAMUS. I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
    To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face.  
    Thisby!
  THISBY. My love! thou art my love, I think.
  PYRAMUS. Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace;
    And like Limander am I trusty still.
  THISBY. And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
  PYRAMUS. Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
  THISBY. As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
  PYRAMUS. O, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
  THISBY. I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.
  PYRAMUS. Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?
  THISBY. Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.
                                       Exeunt PYRAMUS and THISBY
  WALL. Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so;
    And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.           Exit WALL
  THESEUS. Now is the moon used between the two neighbours.
  DEMETRIUS. No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear
    without warning.
  HIPPOLYTA. This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
  THESEUS. The best in this kind are but shadows; and the worst are
    no worse, if imagination amend them.  
  HIPPOLYTA. It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.
  THESEUS. If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves,
    they may pass for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts in, a
    man and a lion.

                   Enter LION and MOONSHINE

  LION. You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear
    The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,
    May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here,
    When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
    Then know that I as Snug the joiner am
    A lion fell, nor else no lion's dam;
    For, if I should as lion come in strife
    Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.
  THESEUS. A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.
  DEMETRIUS. The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.
  LYSANDER. This lion is a very fox for his valour.
  THESEUS. True; and a goose for his discretion.
  DEMETRIUS. Not so, my lord; for his valour cannot carry his  
    discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
  THESEUS. His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour; for
    the goose carries not the fox. It is well. Leave it to his
    discretion, and let us listen to the Moon.
  MOONSHINE. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present-
  DEMETRIUS. He should have worn the horns on his head.
  THESEUS. He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the
    circumference.
  MOONSHINE. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present;
    Myself the Man i' th' Moon do seem to be.
  THESEUS. This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man should
    be put into the lantern. How is it else the man i' th' moon?
  DEMETRIUS. He dares not come there for the candle; for, you see, it
    is already in snuff.
  HIPPOLYTA. I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change!
  THESEUS. It appears, by his small light of discretion, that he is
    in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay
    the time.
  LYSANDER. Proceed, Moon.
  MOON. All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is  
    the moon; I, the Man i' th' Moon; this thorn-bush, my thorn-bush;
    and this dog, my dog.
  DEMETRIUS. Why, all these should be in the lantern; for all these
    are in the moon. But silence; here comes Thisby.

                        Re-enter THISBY

  THISBY. This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?
  LION. [Roaring] O-                           [THISBY runs off]
  DEMETRIUS. Well roar'd, Lion.
  THESEUS. Well run, Thisby.
  HIPPOLYTA. Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a good
    grace.            [The LION tears THISBY'S Mantle, and exit]
  THESEUS. Well mous'd, Lion.

                        Re-enter PYRAMUS

  DEMETRIUS. And then came Pyramus.
  LYSANDER. And so the lion vanish'd.
  PYRAMUS. Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;  
    I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;
    For, by thy gracious golden, glittering gleams,
    I trust to take of truest Thisby sight.
             But stay, O spite!
             But mark, poor knight,
           What dreadful dole is here!
             Eyes, do you see?
             How can it he?
           O dainty duck! O dear!
             Thy mantle good,
             What! stain'd with blood?
           Approach, ye Furies fell.
             O Fates! come, come;
             Cut thread and thrum;
           Quail, crush, conclude, and quell.
  THESEUS. This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go
    near to make a man look sad.
  HIPPOLYTA. Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.
  PYRAMUS. O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame?
    Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear;  
    Which is- no, no- which was the fairest dame
    That liv'd, that lov'd, that lik'd, that look'd with cheer.
             Come, tears, confound;
             Out, sword, and wound
           The pap of Pyramus;
             Ay, that left pap,
             Where heart doth hop.               [Stabs himself]
           Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
             Now am I dead,
             Now am I fled;
           My soul is in the sky.
             Tongue, lose thy light;
             Moon, take thy flight.             [Exit MOONSHINE]
           Now die, die, die, die, die.                   [Dies]
  DEMETRIUS. No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.
  LYSANDER. Less than an ace, man; for he is dead; he is nothing.
  THESEUS. With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and yet
    prove an ass.
  HIPPOLYTA. How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisby comes back
    and finds her lover?  

                       Re-enter THISBY

  THESEUS. She will find him by starlight. Here she comes; and her
    passion ends the play.
  HIPPOLYTA. Methinks she should not use a long one for such a
    Pyramus; I hope she will be brief.
  DEMETRIUS. A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which
    Thisby, is the better- he for a man, God warrant us: She for a
    woman, God bless us!
  LYSANDER. She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.
  DEMETRIUS. And thus she moans, videlicet:-
  THISBY.      Asleep, my love?
               What, dead, my dove?
             O Pyramus, arise,
               Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
               Dead, dead? A tomb
             Must cover thy sweet eyes.
               These lily lips,
               This cherry nose,  
             These yellow cowslip cheeks,
               Are gone, are gone;
               Lovers, make moan;
             His eyes were green as leeks.
               O Sisters Three,
               Come, come to me,
             With hands as pale as milk;
               Lay them in gore,
               Since you have shore
             With shears his thread of silk.
               Tongue, not a word.
               Come, trusty sword;
             Come, blade, my breast imbrue.      [Stabs herself]
               And farewell, friends;
               Thus Thisby ends;
             Adieu, adieu, adieu.                         [Dies]
  THESEUS. Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
  DEMETRIUS. Ay, and Wall too.
  BOTTOM. [Starting up] No, I assure you; the wall is down that
    parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the Epilogue, or  
    to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company?
  THESEUS. No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no excuse.
    Never excuse; for when the players are all dead there need none
    to be blamed. Marry, if he that writ it had played Pyramus, and
    hang'd himself in Thisby's garter, it would have been a fine
    tragedy. And so it is, truly; and very notably discharg'd. But
    come, your Bergomask; let your epilogue alone.     [A dance]
    The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
    Lovers, to bed; 'tis almost fairy time.
    I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn,
    As much as we this night have overwatch'd.
    This palpable-gross play hath well beguil'd
    The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
    A fortnight hold we this solemnity,
    In nightly revels and new jollity.                    Exeunt

                     Enter PUCK with a broom

  PUCK.      Now the hungry lion roars,
             And the wolf behowls the moon;  
             Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
             All with weary task fordone.
             Now the wasted brands do glow,
             Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
             Puts the wretch that lies in woe
             In remembrance of a shroud.
             Now it is the time of night
             That the graves, all gaping wide,
             Every one lets forth his sprite,
             In the church-way paths to glide.
             And we fairies, that do run
             By the triple Hecate's team
             From the presence of the sun,
             Following darkness like a dream,
             Now are frolic. Not a mouse
             Shall disturb this hallowed house.
             I am sent with broom before,
             To sweep the dust behind the door.

         Enter OBERON and TITANIA, with all their train  

  OBERON.    Through the house give glimmering light,
             By the dead and drowsy fire;
             Every elf and fairy sprite
             Hop as light as bird from brier;
             And this ditty, after me,
             Sing and dance it trippingly.
  TITANIA.      First, rehearse your song by rote,
                To each word a warbling note;
                Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
                Will we sing, and bless this place.

           [OBERON leading, the FAIRIES sing and dance]

  OBERON.    Now, until the break of day,
             Through this house each fairy stray.
             To the best bride-bed will we,
             Which by us shall blessed be;
             And the issue there create
             Ever shall be fortunate.  
             So shall all the couples three
             Ever true in loving be;
             And the blots of Nature's hand
             Shall not in their issue stand;
             Never mole, hare-lip, nor scar,
             Nor mark prodigious, such as are
             Despised in nativity,
             Shall upon their children be.
             With this field-dew consecrate,
             Every fairy take his gait,
             And each several chamber bless,
             Through this palace, with sweet peace;
             And the owner of it blest
             Ever shall in safety rest.
             Trip away; make no stay;
             Meet me all by break of day.    Exeunt all but PUCK
  PUCK.      If we shadows have offended,
             Think but this, and all is mended,
             That you have but slumb'red here
             While these visions did appear.  
             And this weak and idle theme,
             No more yielding but a dream,
             Gentles, do not reprehend.
             If you pardon, we will mend.
             And, as I am an honest Puck,
             If we have unearned luck
             Now to scape the serpent's tongue,
             We will make amends ere long;
             Else the Puck a liar call.
             So, good night unto you all.
             Give me your hands, if we be friends,
             And Robin shall restore amends.                Exit

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1599


MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING


by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  Don Pedro, Prince of Arragon.
  Don John, his bastard brother.
  Claudio, a young lord of Florence.
  Benedick, a Young lord of Padua.
  Leonato, Governor of Messina.
  Antonio, an old man, his brother.
  Balthasar, attendant on Don Pedro.
  Borachio, follower of Don John.
  Conrade, follower of Don John.
  Friar Francis.
  Dogberry, a Constable.
  Verges, a Headborough.
  A Sexton.
  A Boy.

  Hero, daughter to Leonato.
  Beatrice, niece to Leonato.
  Margaret, waiting gentlewoman attending on Hero.
  Ursula, waiting gentlewoman attending on Hero.

  Messengers, Watch, Attendants, etc.  




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE.--Messina.


ACT I. Scene I.
An orchard before Leonato's house.

Enter Leonato (Governor of Messina), Hero (his Daughter),
and Beatrice (his Niece), with a Messenger.

  Leon. I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Arragon comes this
    night to Messina.
  Mess. He is very near by this. He was not three leagues off when I
    left him.
  Leon. How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?
  Mess. But few of any sort, and none of name.
  Leon. A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full
    numbers. I find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much honour on
    a young Florentine called Claudio.
  Mess. Much deserv'd on his part, and equally rememb'red by Don
    Pedro. He hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing
    in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion. He hath indeed
    better bett'red expectation than you must expect of me to tell
    you how.
  Leon. He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it.
  Mess. I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much  
    joy in him; even so much that joy could not show itself modest
    enough without a badge of bitterness.
  Leon. Did he break out into tears?
  Mess. In great measure.
  Leon. A kind overflow of kindness. There are no faces truer than
    those that are so wash'd. How much better is it to weep at joy
    than to joy at weeping!
  Beat. I pray you, is Signior Mountanto return'd from the wars or no?
  Mess. I know none of that name, lady. There was none such in the
    army of any sort.
  Leon. What is he that you ask for, niece?
  Hero. My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.
  Mess. O, he's return'd, and as pleasant as ever he was.
  Beat. He set up his bills here in Messina and challeng'd Cupid at
    the flight, and my uncle's fool, reading the challenge,
    subscrib'd for Cupid and challeng'd him at the burbolt. I pray
    you, how many hath he kill'd and eaten in these wars? But how
    many hath he kill'd? For indeed I promised to eat all of his
    killing.
  Leon. Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick too much; but he'll  
    be meet with you, I doubt it not.
  Mess. He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.
  Beat. You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it. He is a
    very valiant trencherman; he hath an excellent stomach.
  Mess. And a good soldier too, lady.
  Beat. And a good soldier to a lady; but what is he to a lord?
  Mess. A lord to a lord, a man to a man; stuff'd with all honourable
    virtues.
  Beat. It is so indeed. He is no less than a stuff'd man; but for
    the stuffing--well, we are all mortal.
  Leon. You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is a kind of merry
    war betwixt Signior Benedick and her. They never meet but there's
    a skirmish of wit between them.
  Beat. Alas, he gets nothing by that! In our last conflict four of
    his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man govern'd
    with one; so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let
    him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse; for
    it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable
    creature. Who is his companion now? He hath every month a new
    sworn brother.  
  Mess. Is't possible?
  Beat. Very easily possible. He wears his faith but as the fashion
    of his hat; it ever changes with the next block.
  Mess. I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
  Beat. No. An he were, I would burn my study. But I pray you, who is
    his companion? Is there no young squarer now that will make a
    voyage with him to the devil?
  Mess. He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.
  Beat. O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease! He is sooner
    caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God
    help the noble Claudio! If he have caught the Benedick, it will
    cost him a thousand pound ere 'a be cured.
  Mess. I will hold friends with you, lady.
  Beat. Do, good friend.
  Leon. You will never run mad, niece.
  Beat. No, not till a hot January.
  Mess. Don Pedro is approach'd.

  Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, Balthasar, and John the Bastard.
  
  Pedro. Good Signior Leonato, are you come to meet your trouble? The
    fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.
  Leon. Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace;
    for trouble being gone, comfort should remain; but when you depart
    from me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.
  Pedro. You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this is your
    daughter.
  Leon. Her mother hath many times told me so.
  Bene. Were you in doubt, sir, that you ask'd her?
  Leon. Signior Benedick, no; for then were you a child.
  Pedro. You have it full, Benedick. We may guess by this what you
    are, being a man. Truly the lady fathers herself. Be happy, lady;
    for you are like an honourable father.
  Bene. If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not have his head
    on her shoulders for all Messina, as like him as she is.
  Beat. I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior Benedick.
    Nobody marks you.
  Bene. What, my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?
  Beat. Is it possible Disdain should die while she hath such meet
    food to feed it as Signior Benedick? Courtesy itself must convert  
    to disdain if you come in her presence.
  Bene. Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I am loved of
    all ladies, only you excepted; and I would I could find in my
    heart that I had not a hard heart, for truly I love none.
  Beat. A dear happiness to women! They would else have been troubled
    with a pernicious suitor. I thank God and my cold blood, I am of
    your humour for that. I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow
    than a man swear he loves me.
  Bene. God keep your ladyship still in that mind! So some gentleman
    or other shall scape a predestinate scratch'd face.
  Beat. Scratching could not make it worse an 'twere such a face as
    yours were.
  Bene. Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
  Beat. A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.
  Bene. I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a
    continuer. But keep your way, a God's name! I have done.
  Beat. You always end with a jade's trick. I know you of old.
  Pedro. That is the sum of all, Leonato. Signior Claudio and Signior
    Benedick, my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all. I tell him
    we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartly prays  
    some occasion may detain us longer. I dare swear he is no
    hypocrite, but prays from his heart.
  Leon. If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn. [To Don
    John] Let me bid you welcome, my lord. Being reconciled to the
    Prince your brother, I owe you all duty.
  John. I thank you. I am not of many words, but I thank you.
  Leon. Please it your Grace lead on?
  Pedro. Your hand, Leonato. We will go together.
                            Exeunt. Manent Benedick and Claudio.
  Claud. Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?
  Bene. I noted her not, but I look'd on her.
  Claud. Is she not a modest young lady?
  Bene. Do you question me, as an honest man should do, for my simple
    true judgment? or would you have me speak after my custom, as
    being a professed tyrant to their sex?
  Claud. No. I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
  Bene. Why, i' faith, methinks she's too low for a high praise,
    too brown for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise.
    Only this commendation I can afford her, that were she other
    than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she  
    is, I do not like her.
  Claud. Thou thinkest I am in sport. I pray thee tell me truly how
    thou lik'st her.
  Bene. Would you buy her, that you enquire after her?
  Claud. Can the world buy such a jewel?
  Bene. Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you this with a sad
    brow? or do you play the flouting Jack, to tell us Cupid is a
    good hare-finder and Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key
    shall a man take you to go in the song?
  Claud. In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I look'd on.
  Bene. I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter.
    There's her cousin, an she were not possess'd with a fury,exceeds
    her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of
    December. But I hope you have no intent to turn husband, have
    you?
  Claud. I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the
    contrary, if Hero would be my wife.
  Bene. Is't come to this? In faith, hath not the world one man but
    he will wear his cap with suspicion? Shall I never see a
    bachelor of threescore again? Go to, i' faith! An thou wilt needs  
    thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it and sigh away
    Sundays.

                       Enter Don Pedro.

    Look! Don Pedro is returned to seek you.
  Pedro. What secret hath held you here, that you followed not to
    Leonato's?
  Bene. I would your Grace would constrain me to tell.
  Pedro. I charge thee on thy allegiance.
  Bene. You hear, Count Claudio. I can be secret as a dumb man, I
    would have you think so; but, on my allegiance--mark you this-on
    my allegiance! he is in love. With who? Now that is your Grace's
    part. Mark how short his answer is: With Hero, Leonato's short
    daughter.
  Claud. If this were so, so were it utt'red.
  Bene. Like the old tale, my lord: 'It is not so, nor 'twas not so;
    but indeed, God forbid it should be so!'
  Claud. If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be
    otherwise.  
  Pedro. Amen, if you love her; for the lady is very well worthy.
  Claud. You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.
  Pedro. By my troth, I speak my thought.
  Claud. And, in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.
  Bene. And, by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.
  Claud. That I love her, I feel.
  Pedro. That she is worthy, I know.
  Bene. That I neither feel how she should be loved, nor know how she
    should be worthy, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me.
    I will die in it at the stake.
  Pedro. Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of
    beauty.
  Claud. And never could maintain his part but in the force of his
    will.
  Bene. That a woman conceived me, I thank her; that she brought me
    up, I likewise give her most humble thanks; but that I will have
    a rechate winded in my forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible
    baldrick, all women shall pardon me. Because I will not do them
    the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the right to trust
    none; and the fine is (for the which I may go the finer), I will  
    live a bachelor.
  Pedro. I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.
  Bene. With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord; not with
    love. Prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get
    again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen
    and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of
    blind Cupid.
  Pedro. Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wilt
    prove a notable argument.
  Bene. If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me; and
    he that hits me, let him be clapp'd on the shoulder and call'd
    Adam.
  Pedro. Well, as time shall try.
    'In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.'
  Bene. The savage bull may; but if ever the sensible Benedick bear
    it, pluck off the bull's horns and set them in my forehead, and
    let me be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they write
    'Here is good horse to hire,' let them signify under my sign
    'Here you may see Benedick the married man.'
  Claud. If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.  
  Pedro. Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou
    wilt quake for this shortly.
  Bene. I look for an earthquake too then.
  Pedro. Well, you will temporize with the hours. In the meantime,
    good Signior Benedick, repair to Leonato's, commend me to him and
    tell him I will not fail him at supper; for indeed he hath made
    great preparation.
  Bene. I have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage; and
    so I commit you--
  Claud. To the tuition of God. From my house--if I had it--
  Pedro. The sixth of July. Your loving friend, Benedick.
  Bene. Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your discourse is
    sometime guarded with fragments, and the guards are but slightly
    basted on neither. Ere you flout old ends any further, examine
    your conscience. And so I leave you.                   Exit.
  Claud. My liege, your Highness now may do me good.
  Pedro. My love is thine to teach. Teach it but how,
    And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
    Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
  Claud. Hath Leonato any son, my lord?  
  Pedro. No child but Hero; she's his only heir.
    Dost thou affect her, Claudio?
  Claud.O my lord,
    When you went onward on this ended action,
    I look'd upon her with a soldier's eye,
    That lik'd, but had a rougher task in hand
    Than to drive liking to the name of love;
    But now I am return'd and that war-thoughts
    Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
    Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
    All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
    Saying I lik'd her ere I went to wars.
  Pedro. Thou wilt be like a lover presently
    And tire the hearer with a book of words.
    If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
    And I will break with her and with her father,
    And thou shalt have her. Wast not to this end
    That thou began'st to twist so fine a story?
  Claud. How sweetly you do minister to love,
    That know love's grief by his complexion!  
    But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
    I would have salv'd it with a longer treatise.
  Pedro. What need the bridge much broader than the flood?
    The fairest grant is the necessity.
    Look, what will serve is fit. 'Tis once, thou lovest,
    And I will fit thee with the remedy.
    I know we shall have revelling to-night.
    I will assume thy part in some disguise
    And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
    And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart
    And take her hearing prisoner with the force
    And strong encounter of my amorous tale.
    Then after to her father will I break,
    And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
    In practice let us put it presently.                 Exeunt.




Scene II.
A room in Leonato's house.

Enter [at one door] Leonato and [at another door, Antonio] an old man,
brother to Leonato.

  Leon. How now, brother? Where is my cousin your son? Hath he
    provided this music?
  Ant. He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell you strange
    news that you yet dreamt not of.
  Leon. Are they good?
  Ant. As the event stamps them; but they have a good cover, they
    show well outward. The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a
    thick-pleached alley in mine orchard, were thus much overheard by
    a man of mine: the Prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my
    niece your daughter and meant to acknowledge it this night in a
    dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the
    present time by the top and instantly break with you of it.
  Leon. Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
  Ant. A good sharp fellow. I will send for him, and question him
    yourself.
  Leon. No, no. We will hold it as a dream till it appear itself; but  
    I will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better
    prepared for an answer, if peradventure this be true. Go you and
    tell her of it.                              [Exit Antonio.]

         [Enter Antonio's Son with a Musician, and others.]

    [To the Son] Cousin, you know what you have to do.
    --[To the Musician] O, I cry you mercy, friend. Go you with me,
    and I will use your skill.--Good cousin, have a care this busy
    time.                                                Exeunt.




Scene III.
Another room in Leonato's house.]

Enter Sir John the Bastard and Conrade, his companion.

  Con. What the goodyear, my lord! Why are you thus out of measure
    sad?
  John. There is no measure in the occasion that breeds; therefore
    the sadness is without limit.
  Con. You should hear reason.
  John. And when I have heard it, what blessings brings it?
  Con. If not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.
  John. I wonder that thou (being, as thou say'st thou art, born
    under Saturn) goest about to apply a moral medicine to a
    mortifying mischief. I cannot hide what I am: I must be sad when
    I have cause, and smile at no man's jests; eat when I have
    stomach, and wait for no man's leisure; sleep when I am drowsy,
    and tend on no man's business; laugh when I am merry, and claw no
    man in his humour.
  Con. Yea, but you must not make the full show of this till you may
    do it without controlment. You have of late stood out against
    your brother, and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace, where  
    it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair
    weather that you make yourself. It is needful that you frame the
    season for your own harvest.
  John. I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace,
    and it better fits my blood to be disdain'd of all than to
    fashion a carriage to rob love from any. In this, though I cannot
    be said to be a flattering honest man, it must not be denied but
    I am a plain-dealing villain. I am trusted with a muzzle and
    enfranchis'd with a clog; therefore I have decreed not to sing in
    my cage. If I had my mouth, I would bite; if I had my liberty, I
    would do my liking. In the meantime let me be that I am, and seek
    not to alter me.
  Con. Can you make no use of your discontent?
  John. I make all use of it, for I use it only.

                       Enter Borachio.

    Who comes here? What news, Borachio?
  Bora. I came yonder from a great supper. The Prince your brother is
    royally entertain'd by Leonato, and I can give you intelligence  
    of an intended marriage.
  John. Will it serve for any model to build mischief on?
    What is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?
  Bora. Marry, it is your brother's right hand.
  John. Who? the most exquisite Claudio?
  Bora. Even he.
  John. A proper squire! And who? and who? which way looks he?
  Bora. Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.
  John. A very forward March-chick! How came you to this?
  Bora. Being entertain'd for a perfumer, as I was smoking a musty
    room, comes me the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand in sad
    conference. I whipt me behind the arras and there heard it agreed
    upon that the Prince should woo Hero for himself, and having
    obtain'd her, give her to Count Claudio.
  John. Come, come, let us thither. This may prove food to my
    displeasure. That young start-up hath all the glory of my
    overthrow. If I can cross him any way, I bless myself every way.
    You are both sure, and will assist me?
  Con. To the death, my lord.
  John. Let us to the great supper. Their cheer is the greater that  
    I am subdued. Would the cook were o' my mind! Shall we go prove
    what's to be done?
  Bora. We'll wait upon your lordship.
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. Scene I.
A hall in Leonato's house.

Enter Leonato, [Antonio] his Brother, Hero his Daughter,
and Beatrice his Niece, and a Kinsman; [also Margaret and Ursula].

  Leon. Was not Count John here at supper?
  Ant. I saw him not.
  Beat. How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see him but I am
    heart-burn'd an hour after.
  Hero. He is of a very melancholy disposition.
  Beat. He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway
    between him and Benedick. The one is too like an image and says
    nothing, and the other too like my lady's eldest son, evermore
    tattling.
  Leon. Then half Signior Benedick's tongue in Count John's mouth,
    and half Count John's melancholy in Signior Benedick's face--
  Beat. With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in
    his purse, such a man would win any woman in the world--if 'a
    could get her good will.
  Leon. By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if
    thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.  
  Ant. In faith, she's too curst.
  Beat. Too curst is more than curst. I shall lessen God's sending
    that way, for it is said, 'God sends a curst cow short horns,'
    but to a cow too curst he sends none.
  Leon. So, by being too curst, God will send you no horns.
  Beat. Just, if he send me no husband; for the which blessing I am
    at him upon my knees every morning and evening. Lord, I could not
    endure a husband with a beard on his face. I had rather lie in
    the woollen!
  Leon. You may light on a husband that hath no beard.
  Beat. What should I do with him? dress him in my apparel and make
    him my waiting gentlewoman? He that hath a beard is more than a
    youth, and he that hath no beard is less than a man; and he that
    is more than a youth is not for me; and he that is less than a
    man, I am not for him. Therefore I will even take sixpence in
    earnest of the berrord and lead his apes into hell.
  Leon. Well then, go you into hell?
  Beat. No; but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an
    old cuckold with horns on his head, and say 'Get you to heaven,
    Beatrice, get you to heaven. Here's no place for you maids.' So  
    deliver I up my apes, and away to Saint Peter--for the heavens.
    He shows me where the bachelors sit, and there live we as merry
    as the day is long.
  Ant. [to Hero] Well, niece, I trust you will be rul'd by your
    father.
  Beat. Yes faith. It is my cousin's duty to make cursy and say,
    'Father, as it please you.' But yet for all that, cousin, let him
    be a handsome fellow, or else make another cursy, and say,
    'Father, as it please me.'
  Leon. Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.
  Beat. Not till God make men of some other metal than earth. Would
    it not grieve a woman to be overmaster'd with a piece of valiant
    dust? to make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl?
    No, uncle, I'll none. Adam's sons are my brethren, and truly I
    hold it a sin to match in my kinred.
  Leon. Daughter, remember what I told you. If the Prince do solicit
    you in that kind, you know your answer.
  Beat. The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed
    in good time. If the Prince be too important, tell him there is
    measure in everything, and so dance out the answer. For, hear me,  
    Hero: wooing, wedding, and repenting is as a Scotch jig, a
    measure, and a cinque-pace: the first suit is hot and hasty like
    a Scotch jig--and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly
    modest, as a measure, full of state and ancientry; and then comes
    Repentance and with his bad legs falls into the cinque-pace
    faster and faster, till he sink into his grave.
  Leon. Cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.
  Beat. I have a good eye, uncle; I can see a church by daylight.
  Leon. The revellers are ent'ring, brother. Make good room.
                                                 [Exit Antonio.]

    Enter, [masked,] Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, and Balthasar.
       [With them enter Antonio, also masked. After them enter]
       Don John [and Borachio (without masks), who stand aside
                 and look on during the dance].

  Pedro. Lady, will you walk a bout with your friend?
  Hero. So you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing,
    I am yours for the walk; and especially when I walk away.
  Pedro. With me in your company?  
  Hero. I may say so when I please.
  Pedro. And when please you to say so?
  Hero. When I like your favour, for God defend the lute should be
    like the case!
  Pedro. My visor is Philemon's roof; within the house is Jove.
  Hero. Why then, your visor should be thatch'd.
  Pedro. Speak low if you speak love.         [Takes her aside.]
  Balth. Well, I would you did like me.
  Marg. So would not I for your own sake, for I have many ill
    qualities.
  Balth. Which is one?
  Marg. I say my prayers aloud.
  Balth. I love you the better. The hearers may cry Amen.
  Marg. God match me with a good dancer!
  Balth. Amen.
  Marg. And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done!
    Answer, clerk.
  Balth. No more words. The clerk is answered.
                                              [Takes her aside.]
  Urs. I know you well enough. You are Signior Antonio.  
  Ant. At a word, I am not.
  Urs. I know you by the waggling of your head.
  Ant. To tell you true, I counterfeit him.
  Urs. You could never do him so ill-well unless you were the very
    man. Here's his dry hand up and down. You are he, you are he!
  Ant. At a word, I am not.
  Urs. Come, come, do you think I do not know you by your excellent
    wit? Can virtue hide itself? Go to, mum you are he. Graces will
    appear, and there's an end.              [ They step aside.]
  Beat. Will you not tell me who told you so?
  Bene. No, you shall pardon me.
  Beat. Nor will you not tell me who you are?
  Bene. Not now.
  Beat. That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit out of the
    'Hundred Merry Tales.' Well, this was Signior Benedick that said
    so.
  Bene. What's he?
  Beat. I am sure you know him well enough.
  Bene. Not I, believe me.
  Beat. Did he never make you laugh?  
  Bene. I pray you, what is he?
  Beat. Why, he is the Prince's jester, a very dull fool. Only his
    gift is in devising impossible slanders. None but libertines
    delight in him; and the commendation is not in his wit, but in
    his villany; for he both pleases men and angers them, and then
    they laugh at him and beat him. I am sure he is in the fleet.
    I would he had boarded me.
  Bene. When I know the gentleman, I'll tell him what you say.
  Beat. Do, do. He'll but break a comparison or two on me; which
    peradventure, not marked or not laugh'd at, strikes him into
    melancholy; and then there's a partridge wing saved, for the fool
    will eat no supper that night.
                                                        [Music.]
    We must follow the leaders.
  Bene. In every good thing.
  Beat. Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next
    turning.
        Dance. Exeunt (all but Don John, Borachio, and Claudio].
  John. Sure my brother is amorous on Hero and hath withdrawn her
    father to break with him about it. The ladies follow her and but  
    one visor remains.
  Bora. And that is Claudio. I know him by his bearing.
  John. Are you not Signior Benedick?
  Claud. You know me well. I am he.
  John. Signior, you are very near my brother in his love. He is
    enamour'd on Hero. I pray you dissuade him from her; she is no
    equal for his birth. You may do the part of an honest man in it.
  Claud. How know you he loves her?
  John. I heard him swear his affection.
  Bora. So did I too, and he swore he would marry her tonight.
  John. Come, let us to the banquet.
                                          Exeunt. Manet Claudio.
  Claud. Thus answer I in name of Benedick
    But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
                                                      [Unmasks.]
    'Tis certain so. The Prince wooes for himself.
    Friendship is constant in all other things
    Save in the office and affairs of love.
    Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues;
    Let every eye negotiate for itself  
    And trust no agent; for beauty is a witch
    Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
    This is an accident of hourly proof,
    Which I mistrusted not. Farewell therefore Hero!

                  Enter Benedick [unmasked].

  Bene. Count Claudio?
  Claud. Yea, the same.
  Bene. Come, will you go with me?
  Claud. Whither?
  Bene. Even to the next willow, about your own business, County. What
    fashion will you wear the garland of? about your neck, like an
    usurer's chain? or under your arm, like a lieutenant's scarf? You
    must wear it one way, for the Prince hath got your Hero.
  Claud. I wish him joy of her.
  Bene. Why, that's spoken like an honest drovier. So they sell
    bullocks. But did you think the Prince would have served you
    thus?
  Claud. I pray you leave me.  
  Bene. Ho! now you strike like the blind man! 'Twas the boy that
    stole your meat, and you'll beat the post.
  Claud. If it will not be, I'll leave you.                Exit.
  Bene. Alas, poor hurt fowl! now will he creep into sedges. But,
    that my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not know me! The
    Prince's fool! Ha! it may be I go under that title because I am
    merry. Yea, but so I am apt to do myself wrong. I am not so
    reputed. It is the base (though bitter) disposition of Beatrice
    that puts the world into her person and so gives me out. Well,
    I'll be revenged as I may.

                         Enter Don Pedro.

  Pedro. Now, signior, where's the Count? Did you see him?
  Bene. Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame, I found
    him here as melancholy as a lodge in a warren. I told him, and I
    think I told him true, that your Grace had got the good will of
    this young lady, and I off'red him my company to a willow tree,
    either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him
    up a rod, as being worthy to be whipt.  
  Pedro. To be whipt? What's his fault?
  Bene. The flat transgression of a schoolboy who, being overjoyed
    with finding a bird's nest, shows it his companion, and he steals
    it.
  Pedro. Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? The transgression is
    in the stealer.
  Bene. Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the
    garland too; for the garland he might have worn himself, and the
    rod he might have bestowed on you, who, as I take it, have stol'n
    his bird's nest.
  Pedro. I will but teach them to sing and restore them to the owner.
  Bene. If their singing answer your saying, by my faith you say
    honestly.
  Pedro. The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you. The gentleman that
    danc'd with her told her she is much wrong'd by you.
  Bene. O, she misus'd me past the endurance of a block! An oak but
    with one green leaf on it would have answered her; my very visor
    began to assume life and scold with her. She told me, not
    thinking I had been myself, that I was the Prince's jester, that
    I was duller than a great thaw; huddling jest upon jest with such  
    impossible conveyance upon me that I stood like a man at a mark,
    with a whole army shooting at me. She speaks poniards, and every
    word stabs. If her breath were as terrible as her terminations,
    there were no living near her; she would infect to the North
    Star. I would not marry her though she were endowed with all that
    Adam had left him before he transgress'd. She would have made
    Hercules have turn'd spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make
    the fire too. Come, talk not of her. You shall find her the
    infernal Ate in good apparel. I would to God some scholar would
    conjure her, for certainly, while she is here, a man may live as
    quiet in hell as in a sanctuary; and people sin upon purpose,
    because they would go thither; so indeed all disquiet, horror,
    and perturbation follows her.

           Enter Claudio and Beatrice, Leonato, Hero.

  Pedro. Look, here she comes.
  Bene. Will your Grace command me any service to the world's end? I
    will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can
    devise to send me on; I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the  
    furthest inch of Asia; bring you the length of Prester John's
    foot; fetch you a hair off the great Cham's beard; do you any
    embassage to the Pygmies--rather than hold three words'
    conference with this harpy. You have no employment for me?
  Pedro. None, but to desire your good company.
  Bene. O God, sir, here's a dish I love not! I cannot endure my Lady
    Tongue.                                              [Exit.]
  Pedro. Come, lady, come; you have lost the heart of Signior
    Benedick.
  Beat. Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile, and I gave him use for
    it--a double heart for his single one. Marry, once before he won
    it of me with false dice; therefore your Grace may well say I
    have lost it.
  Pedro. You have put him down, lady; you have put him down.
  Beat. So I would not he should do me, my lord, lest I should prove
    the mother of fools. I have brought Count Claudio, whom you sent
    me to seek.
  Pedro. Why, how now, Count? Wherefore are you sad?
  Claud. Not sad, my lord.
  Pedro. How then? sick?  
  Claud. Neither, my lord.
  Beat. The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well; but
    civil count--civil as an orange, and something of that jealous
    complexion.
  Pedro. I' faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true; though I'll
    be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is false. Here, Claudio, I
    have wooed in thy name, and fair Hero is won. I have broke with
    her father, and his good will obtained. Name the day of marriage,
    and God give thee joy!
  Leon. Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes. His
    Grace hath made the match, and all grace say Amen to it!
  Beat. Speak, Count, 'tis your cue.
  Claud. Silence is the perfectest herald of joy. I were but little
    happy if I could say how much. Lady, as you are mine, I am yours.
    I give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange.
  Beat. Speak, cousin; or, if you cannot, stop his mouth with a kiss
    and let not him speak neither.
  Pedro. In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.
  Beat. Yea, my lord; I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy
    side of care. My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her  
    heart.
  Claud. And so she doth, cousin.
  Beat. Good Lord, for alliance! Thus goes every one to the world but
    I, and I am sunburnt. I may sit in a corner and cry 'Heigh-ho for
    a husband!'
  Pedro. Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.
  Beat. I would rather have one of your father's getting. Hath your
    Grace ne'er a brother like you? Your father got excellent
    husbands, if a maid could come by them.
  Pedro. Will you have me, lady?
  Beat. No, my lord, unless I might have another for working days:
    your Grace is too costly to wear every day. But I beseech your
    Grace pardon me. I was born to speak all mirth and no matter.
  Pedro. Your silence most offends me, and to be merry best becomes
    you, for out o' question you were born in a merry hour.
  Beat. No, sure, my lord, my mother cried; but then there was a star
    danc'd, and under that was I born. Cousins, God give you joy!
  Leon. Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?
  Beat. I cry you mercy, uncle, By your Grace's pardon.    Exit.
  Pedro. By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.  
  Leon. There's little of the melancholy element in her, my lord. She
    is never sad but when she sleeps, and not ever sad then; for I
    have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamt of unhappiness
    and wak'd herself with laughing.
  Pedro. She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.
  Leon. O, by no means! She mocks all her wooers out of suit.
  Pedro. She were an excellent wife for Benedick.
  Leon. O Lord, my lord! if they were but a week married, they would
    talk themselves mad.
  Pedro. County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?
  Claud. To-morrow, my lord. Time goes on crutches till love have all
    his rites.
  Leon. Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just
    sevennight; and a time too brief too, to have all things answer
    my mind.
  Pedro. Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing;
    but I warrant thee, Claudio, the time shall not go dully by us.
    I will in the interim undertake one of Hercules' labours, which
    is, to bring Signior Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a
    mountain of affection th' one with th' other. I would fain have  
    it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion it if you three will
    but minister such assistance as I shall give you direction.
  Leon. My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights'
    watchings.
  Claud. And I, my lord.
  Pedro. And you too, gentle Hero?
  Hero. I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousin to a
    good husband.
  Pedro. And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that I know.
    Thus far can I praise him: he is of a noble strain, of approved
    valour, and confirm'd honesty. I will teach you how to humour
    your cousin, that she shall fall in love with Benedick; and I,
    [to Leonato and Claudio] with your two helps, will so practise on
    Benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his queasy
    stomach, he shall fall in love with Beatrice. If we can do this,
    Cupid is no longer an archer; his glory shall be ours, for we are
    the only love-gods. Go in with me, and I will tell you my drift.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
A hall in Leonato's house.

Enter [Don] John and Borachio.

  John. It is so. The Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of
    Leonato.
  Bora. Yea, my lord; but I can cross it.
  John. Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be med'cinable to me.
    I am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his
    affection ranges evenly with mine. How canst thou cross this
    marriage?
  Bora. Not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that no dishonesty
    shall appear in me.
  John. Show me briefly how.
  Bora. I think I told your lordship, a year since, how much I am in
    the favour of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.
  John. I remember.
  Bora. I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her
    to look out at her lady's chamber window.
  John. What life is in that to be the death of this marriage?
  Bora. The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to the  
    Prince your brother; spare not to tell him that he hath wronged
    his honour in marrying the renowned Claudio (whose estimation do
    you mightily hold up) to a contaminated stale, such a one as
    Hero.
  John. What proof shall I make of that?
  Bora. Proof enough to misuse the Prince, to vex Claudio, to undo
    Hero, and kill Leonato. Look you for any other issue?
  John. Only to despite them I will endeavour anything.
  Bora. Go then; find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and the Count
    Claudio alone; tell them that you know that Hero loves me; intend
    a kind of zeal both to the Prince and Claudio, as--in love of
    your brother's honour, who hath made this match, and his friend's
    reputation, who is thus like to be cozen'd with the semblance of
    a maid--that you have discover'd thus. They will scarcely believe
    this without trial. Offer them instances; which shall bear no
    less likelihood than to see me at her chamber window, hear me
    call Margaret Hero, hear Margaret term me Claudio; and bring them
    to see this the very night before the intended wedding (for in
    the meantime I will so fashion the matter that Hero shall be
    absent) and there shall appear such seeming truth of Hero's  
    disloyalty that jealousy shall be call'd assurance and all the
    preparation overthrown.
  John. Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in
    practice. Be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a
    thousand ducats.
  Bora. Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not
    shame me.
  John. I will presently go learn their day of marriage.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene III.
Leonato's orchard.

Enter Benedick alone.

  Bene. Boy!

                    [Enter Boy.]

  Boy. Signior?
  Bene. In my chamber window lies a book. Bring it hither to me in
    the orchard.
  Boy. I am here already, sir.
  Bene. I know that, but I would have thee hence and here again.
    (Exit Boy.) I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much
    another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviours to love,
    will, after he hath laugh'd at such shallow follies in others,
    become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love; and such
    a man is Claudio. I have known when there was no music with him
    but the drum and the fife; and now had he rather hear the tabor
    and the pipe. I have known when he would have walk'd ten mile
    afoot to see a good armour; and now will he lie ten nights awake  
    carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont to speak plain
    and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier; and now is
    he turn'd orthography; his words are a very fantastical banquet--
    just so many strange dishes. May I be so converted and see with
    these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not. I will not be sworn but
    love may transform me to an oyster; but I'll take my oath on it,
    till he have made an oyster of me he shall never make me such a
    fool. One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet I am
    well; another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all graces be in
    one woman, one woman shall not come in my grace. Rich she shall
    be, that's certain; wise, or I'll none; virtuous, or I'll never
    cheapen her; fair, or I'll never look on her; mild, or come not
    near me; noble, or not I for an angel; of good discourse, an
    excellent musician, and her hair shall be of what colour it
    please God. Ha, the Prince and Monsieur Love! I will hide me in
    the arbour.                                         [Hides.]

              Enter Don Pedro, Leonato, Claudio.
                      Music [within].
  
  Pedro. Come, shall we hear this music?
  Claud. Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
    As hush'd on purpose to grace harmony!
  Pedro. See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
  Claud. O, very well, my lord. The music ended,
    We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.

                   Enter Balthasar with Music.

  Pedro. Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song again.
  Balth. O, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice
    To slander music any more than once.
  Pedro. It is the witness still of excellency
    To put a strange face on his own perfection.
    I pray thee sing, and let me woo no more.
  Balth. Because you talk of wooing, I will sing,
    Since many a wooer doth commence his suit
    To her he thinks not worthy, yet he wooes,
    Yet will he swear he loves.
  Pedro. Nay, pray thee come;  
    Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
    Do it in notes.
  Balth. Note this before my notes:
    There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.
  Pedro. Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!
    Note notes, forsooth, and nothing!                  [Music.]
  Bene. [aside] Now divine air! Now is his soul ravish'd! Is it not
    strange that sheep's guts should hale souls out of men's bodies?
    Well, a horn for my money, when all's done.
                                              [Balthasar sings.]
                      The Song.

        Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more!
          Men were deceivers ever,
        One foot in sea, and one on shore;
          To one thing constant never.
            Then sigh not so,
            But let them go,
          And be you blithe and bonny,
        Converting all your sounds of woe  
          Into Hey nonny, nonny.

        Sing no more ditties, sing no moe,
          Of dumps so dull and heavy!
        The fraud of men was ever so,
          Since summer first was leavy.
            Then sigh not so, &c.

  Pedro. By my troth, a good song.
  Balth. And an ill singer, my lord.
  Pedro. Ha, no, no, faith! Thou sing'st well enough for a shift.
  Bene. [aside] An he had been a dog that should have howl'd thus,
    they would have hang'd him; and I pray God his bad voice bode no
    mischief. I had as live have heard the night raven, come what
    plague could have come after it.
  Pedro. Yea, marry. Dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee get us
    some excellent music; for to-morrow night we would have it at the
    Lady Hero's chamber window.
  Balth. The best I can, my lord.
  Pedro. Do so. Farewell.  
                                Exit Balthasar [with Musicians].
    Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of to-day? that
    your niece Beatrice was in love with Signior Benedick?
  Claud. O, ay!-[Aside to Pedro] Stalk on, stalk on; the fowl sits.
    --I did never think that lady would have loved any man.
  Leon. No, nor I neither; but most wonderful that she should so dote
    on Signior Benedick, whom she hath in all outward behaviours
    seem'd ever to abhor.
  Bene. [aside] Is't possible? Sits the wind in that corner?
  Leon. By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think of it, but
    that she loves him with an enraged affection. It is past the
    infinite of thought.
  Pedro. May be she doth but counterfeit.
  Claud. Faith, like enough.
  Leon. O God, counterfeit? There was never counterfeit of passion
    came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.
  Pedro. Why, what effects of passion shows she?
  Claud. [aside] Bait the hook well! This fish will bite.
  Leon. What effects, my lord? She will sit you--you heard my
    daughter tell you how.  
  Claud. She did indeed.
  Pedro. How, how, I pray you? You amaze me. I would have thought her
    spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.
  Leon. I would have sworn it had, my lord--especially against
    Benedick.
  Bene. [aside] I should think this a gull but that the white-bearded
    fellow speaks it. Knavery cannot, sure, hide himself in such
    reverence.
  Claud. [aside] He hath ta'en th' infection. Hold it up.
  Pedro. Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?
  Leon. No, and swears she never will. That's her torment.
  Claud. 'Tis true indeed. So your daughter says. 'Shall I,' says
    she, 'that have so oft encount'red him with scorn, write to him
    that I love him?'"
  Leon. This says she now when she is beginning to write to him; for
    she'll be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her
    smock till she have writ a sheet of paper. My daughter tells us
    all.
  Claud. Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a pretty jest
    your daughter told us of.  
  Leon. O, when she had writ it, and was reading it over, she found
    'Benedick' and 'Beatrice' between the sheet?
  Claud. That.
  Leon. O, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, rail'd at
    herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she
    knew would flout her. 'I measure him,' says she, 'by my own
    spirit; for I should flout him if he writ to me. Yea, though I
    love him, I should.'
  Claud. Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs, beats her
    heart, tears her hair, prays, curses--'O sweet Benedick! God give
    me patience!'
  Leon. She doth indeed; my daughter says so. And the ecstasy hath so
    much overborne her that my daughter is sometime afeard she will
    do a desperate outrage to herself. It is very true.
  Pedro. It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other, if she
    will not discover it.
  Claud. To what end? He would make but a sport of it and torment the
    poor lady worse.
  Pedro. An he should, it were an alms to hang him! She's an
    excellent sweet lady, and (out of all suspicion) she is virtuous.  
  Claud. And she is exceeding wise.
  Pedro. In everything but in loving Benedick.
  Leon. O, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body,
    we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory. I am sorry
    for her, as I have just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.
  Pedro. I would she had bestowed this dotage on me. I would have
    daff'd all other respects and made her half myself. I pray you
    tell Benedick of it and hear what 'a will say.
  Leon. Were it good, think you?
  Claud. Hero thinks surely she will die; for she says she will die
    if he love her not, and she will die ere she make her love known,
    and she will die, if he woo her, rather than she will bate one
    breath of her accustomed crossness.
  Pedro. She doth well. If she should make tender of her love, 'tis
    very possible he'll scorn it; for the man (as you know all) hath
    a contemptible spirit.
  Claud. He is a very proper man.
  Pedro. He hath indeed a good outward happiness.
  Claud. Before God! and in my mind, very wise.
  Pedro. He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.  
  Claud. And I take him to be valiant.
  Pedro. As Hector, I assure you; and in the managing of quarrels you
    may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great
    discretion, or undertakes them with a most Christianlike fear.
  Leon. If he do fear God, 'a must necessarily keep peace. If he
    break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and
    trembling.
  Pedro. And so will he do; for the man doth fear God, howsoever it
    seems not in him by some large jests he will make. Well, I am
    sorry for your niece. Shall we go seek Benedick and tell him of
    her love?
  Claud. Never tell him, my lord. Let her wear it out with good
    counsel.
  Leon. Nay, that's impossible; she may wear her heart out first.
  Pedro. Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter. Let it
    cool the while. I love Benedick well, and I could wish he would
    modestly examine himself to see how much he is unworthy so good a
    lady.
  Leon. My lord, will you .walk? Dinner is ready.
                                               [They walk away.]  
  Claud. If he dote on her upon this, I will never trust my
    expectation.
  Pedro. Let there be the same net spread for her, and that must your
    daughter and her gentlewomen carry. The sport will be, when they
    hold one an opinion of another's dotage, and no such matter.
    That's the scene that I would see, which will be merely a dumb
    show. Let us send her to call him in to dinner.
                       Exeunt [Don Pedro, Claudio, and Leonato].

                [Benedick advances from the arbour.]

  Bene. This can be no trick. The conference was sadly borne; they
    have the truth of this from Hero; they seem to pity the lady.
    It seems her affections have their full bent. Love me? Why, it
    must be requited. I hear how I am censur'd. They say I will bear
    myself proudly if I perceive the love come from her. They say too
    that she will rather die than give any sign of affection. I did
    never think to marry. I must not seem proud. Happy are they that
    hear their detractions and can put them to mending. They say the
    lady is fair--'tis a truth, I can bear them witness; and virtuous  
    --'tis so, I cannot reprove it; and wise, but for loving me--by
    my troth, it is no addition to her wit, nor no great argument of
    her folly, for I will be horribly in love with her. I may chance
    have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me because I
    have railed so long against marriage. But doth not the appetite
    alters? A man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure
    in his age. Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of
    the brain awe a man from the career of his humour? No, the world
    must be peopled. When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not
    think I should live till I were married.

                 Enter Beatrice.

    Here comes Beatrice. By this day, she's a fair lady! I do spy
    some marks of love in her.
  Beat. Against my will I am sent to bid You come in to dinner.
  Bene. Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.
  Beat. I took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to
    thank me. If it had been painful, I would not have come.
  Bene. You take pleasure then in the message?  
  Beat. Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knives point, and
    choke a daw withal. You have no stomach, signior. Fare you well.
Exit.
  Bene. Ha! 'Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.'
    There's a double meaning in that. 'I took no more pains for those
    thanks than you took pains to thank me.' That's as much as to
    say, 'Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks.' If I
    do not take pity of her, I am a villain; if I do not love her, I
    am a Jew. I will go get her picture.                   Exit.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. Scene I.
Leonato's orchard.

Enter Hero and two Gentlewomen, Margaret and Ursula.

  Hero. Good Margaret, run thee to the parlour.
    There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
    Proposing with the Prince and Claudio.
    Whisper her ear and tell her, I and Ursley
    Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
    Is all of her. Say that thou overheard'st us;
    And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
    Where honeysuckles, ripened by the sun,
    Forbid the sun to enter--like favourites,
    Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
    Against that power that bred it. There will she hide her
    To listen our propose. This is thy office.
    Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
  Marg. I'll make her come, I warrant you, presently.    [Exit.]
  Hero. Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
    As we do trace this alley up and down,
    Our talk must only be of Benedick.  
    When I do name him, let it be thy part
    To praise him more than ever man did merit.
    My talk to thee must be how Benedick
    Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter
    Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made,
    That only wounds by hearsay.

                   [Enter Beatrice.]

    Now begin;
    For look where Beatrice like a lapwing runs
    Close by the ground, to hear our conference.

               [Beatrice hides in the arbour].

  Urs. The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
    Cut with her golden oars the silver stream
    And greedily devour the treacherous bait.
    So angle we for Beatrice, who even now
    Is couched in the woodbine coverture.  
    Fear you not my part of the dialogue.
  Hero. Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing
    Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.
                                     [They approach the arbour.]
    No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful.
    I know her spirits are as coy and wild
    As haggards of the rock.
  Urs. But are you sure
    That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?
  Hero. So says the Prince, and my new-trothed lord.
  Urs. And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
  Hero. They did entreat me to acquaint her of it;
    But I persuaded them, if they lov'd Benedick,
    To wish him wrestle with affection
    And never to let Beatrice know of it.
  Urs. Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman
    Deserve as full, as fortunate a bed
    As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?
  Hero. O god of love! I know he doth deserve
    As much as may be yielded to a man:  
    But Nature never fram'd a woman's heart
    Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice.
    Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
    Misprizing what they look on; and her wit
    Values itself so highly that to her
    All matter else seems weak. She cannot love,
    Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
    She is so self-endeared.
  Urs. Sure I think so;
    And therefore certainly it were not good
    She knew his love, lest she'll make sport at it.
  Hero. Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
    How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featur'd,
    But she would spell him backward. If fair-fac'd,
    She would swear the gentleman should be her sister;
    If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antic,
    Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
    If low, an agate very vilely cut;
    If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
    If silent, why, a block moved with none.  
    So turns she every man the wrong side out
    And never gives to truth and virtue that
    Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.
  Urs. Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
  Hero. No, not to be so odd, and from all fashions,
    As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable.
    But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
    She would mock me into air; O, she would laugh me
    Out of myself, press me to death with wit!
    Therefore let Benedick, like cover'd fire,
    Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly.
    It were a better death than die with mocks,
    Which is as bad as die with tickling.
  Urs. Yet tell her of it. Hear what she will say.
  Hero. No; rather I will go to Benedick
    And counsel him to fight against his passion.
    And truly, I'll devise some honest slanders
    To stain my cousin with. One doth not know
    How much an ill word may empoison liking.
  Urs. O, do not do your cousin such a wrong!  
    She cannot be so much without true judgment
    (Having so swift and excellent a wit
    As she is priz'd to have) as to refuse
    So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.
  Hero. He is the only man of Italy,
    Always excepted my dear Claudio.
  Urs. I pray you be not angry with me, madam,
    Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedick,
    For shape, for bearing, argument, and valour,
    Goes foremost in report through Italy.
  Hero. Indeed he hath an excellent good name.
  Urs. His excellence did earn it ere he had it.
    When are you married, madam?
  Hero. Why, every day to-morrow! Come, go in.
    I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
    Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow.
                                               [They walk away.]
  Urs. She's lim'd, I warrant you! We have caught her, madam.
  Hero. If it prove so, then loving goes by haps;
    Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.  
                                       Exeunt [Hero and Ursula].

    [Beatrice advances from the arbour.]

  Beat. What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
    Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much?
    Contempt, farewell! and maiden pride, adieu!
    No glory lives behind the back of such.
    And, Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
    Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand.
    If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
    To bind our loves up in a holy band;
    For others say thou dost deserve, and I
    Believe it better than reportingly.                    Exit.




Scene II.
A room in Leonato's house.

Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, and Leonato.

  Pedro. I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go
    I toward Arragon.
  Claud. I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.
  Pedro. Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your
    marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear
    it. I will only be bold with Benedick for his company; for, from
    the crown of his head to the sole of his foot, he is all mirth.
    He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bowstring, and the little
    hangman dare not shoot at him. He hath a heart as sound as a
    bell; and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks,
    his tongue speaks.
  Bene. Gallants, I am not as I have been.
  Leon. So say I. Methinks you are sadder.
  Claud. I hope he be in love.
  Pedro. Hang him, truant! There's no true drop of blood in him to be
    truly touch'd with love. If he be sad, he wants money.
  Bene. I have the toothache.  
  Pedro. Draw it.
  Bene. Hang it!
  Claud. You must hang it first and draw it afterwards.
  Pedro. What? sigh for the toothache?
  Leon. Where is but a humour or a worm.
  Bene. Well, every one can master a grief but he that has it.
  Claud. Yet say I he is in love.
  Pedro. There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy
    that he hath to strange disguises; as to be a Dutchman to-day, a
    Frenchman to-morrow; or in the shape of two countries at once, as
    a German from the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from
    the hip upward, no doublet. Unless he have a fancy to this
    foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no fool for fancy, as you
    would have it appear he is.
  Claud. If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing
    old signs. 'A brushes his hat o' mornings. What should that bode?
  Pedro. Hath any man seen him at the barber's?
  Claud. No, but the barber's man hath been seen with him, and the
     old ornament of his cheek hath already stuff'd tennis balls.
  Leon. Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.  
  Pedro. Nay, 'a rubs himself with civet. Can you smell him out by
    that?
  Claud. That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.
  Pedro. The greatest note of it is his melancholy.
  Claud. And when was he wont to wash his face?
  Pedro. Yea, or to paint himself? for the which I hear what they say
    of him.
  Claud. Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is new-crept into a
    lutestring, and now govern'd by stops.
  Pedro. Indeed that tells a heavy tale for him. Conclude, conclude,
    he is in love.
  Claud. Nay, but I know who loves him.
  Pedro. That would I know too. I warrant, one that knows him not.
  Claud. Yes, and his ill conditions; and in despite of all, dies for
    him.
  Pedro. She shall be buried with her face upwards.
  Bene. Yet is this no charm for the toothache. Old signior, walk
    aside with me. I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak
    to you, which these hobby-horses must not hear.
                                  [Exeunt Benedick and Leonato.]  
  Pedro. For my life, to break with him about Beatrice!
  Claud. 'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this played their
    parts with Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one
    another when they meet.

                 Enter John the Bastard.

  John. My lord and brother, God save you.
  Pedro. Good den, brother.
  John. If your leisure serv'd, I would speak with you.
  Pedro. In private?
  John. If it please you. Yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I
    would speak of concerns him.
  Pedro. What's the matter?
  John. [to Claudio] Means your lordship to be married tomorrow?
  Pedro. You know he does.
  John. I know not that, when he knows what I know.
  Claud. If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.
  John. You may think I love you not. Let that appear hereafter, and
    aim better at me by that I now will manifest. For my brother, I  
    think he holds you well and in dearness of heart hath holp to
    effect your ensuing marriage--surely suit ill spent and labour
    ill bestowed!
  Pedro. Why, what's the matter?
  John. I came hither to tell you, and, circumstances short'ned (for
    she has been too long a-talking of), the lady is disloyal.
  Claud. Who? Hero?
  John. Even she--Leonato's Hero, your Hero, every man's Hero.
  Claud. Disloyal?
  John. The word is too good to paint out her wickedness. I could say
    she were worse; think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to
    it. Wonder not till further warrant. Go but with me to-night, you
    shall see her chamber window ent'red, even the night before her
    wedding day. If you love her then, to-morrow wed her. But it
    would better fit your honour to change your mind.
  Claud. May this be so?
  Pedro. I will not think it.
  John. If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you
    know. If you will follow me, I will show you enough; and when you
    have seen more and heard more, proceed accordingly.  
  Claud. If I see anything to-night why I should not marry her
    to-morrow, in the congregation where I should wed, there will I
    shame her.
  Pedro. And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with
    thee to disgrace her.
  John. I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses.
    Bear it coldly but till midnight, and let the issue show itself.
  Pedro. O day untowardly turned!
  Claud. O mischief strangely thwarting!
  John. O plague right well prevented!
    So will you say when you have seen the Sequel.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene III.
A street.

Enter Dogberry and his compartner [Verges], with the Watch.

  Dog. Are you good men and true?
  Verg. Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation,
    body and soul.
  Dog. Nay, that were a punishment too good for them if they should
    have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the Prince's watch.
  Verg. Well, give them their charge, neighbour Dogberry.
  Dog. First, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?
  1. Watch. Hugh Oatcake, sir, or George Seacoal; for they can write
    and read.
  Dog. Come hither, neighbour Seacoal. God hath bless'd you with a
    good name. To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune, but
    to write and read comes by nature.
  2. Watch. Both which, Master Constable--
  Dog. You have. I knew it would be your answer. Well, for your
    favour, sir, why, give God thanks and make no boast of it; and
    for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no
    need of such vanity. You are thought here to be the most  
    senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch. Therefore
    bear you the lanthorn. This is your charge: you shall comprehend
    all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the Prince's
    name.
  2. Watch. How if 'a will not stand?
  Dog. Why then, take no note of him, but let him go, and presently
    call the rest of the watch together and thank God you are rid of
    a knave.
  Verg. If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the
    Prince's subjects.
  Dog. True, and they are to meddle with none but the Prince's
    subjects. You shall also make no noise in the streets; for for
    the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable, and not to be
    endured.
  2. Watch. We will rather sleep than talk. We know what belongs to
    a watch.
  Dog. Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I
    cannot see how sleeping should offend. Only have a care that your
    bills be not stol'n. Well, you are to call at all the alehouses
    and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.  
  2. Watch. How if they will not?
  Dog. Why then, let them alone till they are sober. If they make you
    not then the better answer, You may say they are not the men you
    took them for.
  2. Watch. Well, sir.
  Dog. If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your
    office, to be no true man; and for such kind of men, the less you
    meddle or make with them, why, the more your honesty.
  2. Watch. If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on
    him?
  Dog. Truly, by your office you may; but I think they that touch
    pitch will be defil'd. The most peaceable way for you, if you do
    take a thief, is to let him show himself what he is, and steal
    out of your company.
  Verg. You have been always called a merciful man, partner.
  Dog. Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who
    hath any honesty in him.
  Verg. If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the
    nurse and bid her still it.
  2. Watch. How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?  
  Dog. Why then, depart in peace and let the child wake her with
    crying; for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baes will
    never answer a calf when he bleats.
  Verg. 'Tis very true.
  Dog. This is the end of the charge: you, constable, are to present
    the Prince's own person. If you meet the Prince in the night,
    you may stay him.
  Verg. Nay, by'r lady, that I think 'a cannot.
  Dog. Five shillings to one on't with any man that knows the
    statutes, he may stay him! Marry, not without the Prince be
    willing; for indeed the watch ought to offend no man, and it is
    an offence to stay a man against his will.
  Verg. By'r lady, I think it be so.
  Dog. Ha, ah, ha! Well, masters, good night. An there be any matter
    of weight chances, call up me. Keep your fellows' counsels and
    your own, and good night. Come, neighbour.
  2. Watch. Well, masters, we hear our charge. Let us go sit here
    upon the church bench till two, and then all to bed.
  Dog. One word more, honest neighbours. I pray you watch about
    Signior Leonato's door; for the wedding being there tomorrow,  
    there is a great coil to-night. Adieu. Be vigitant, I beseech
    you.                           Exeunt [Dogberry and Verges].

                     Enter Borachio and Conrade.

  Bora. What, Conrade!
  2. Watch. [aside] Peace! stir not!
  Bora. Conrade, I say!
  Con. Here, man. I am at thy elbow.
  Bora. Mass, and my elbow itch'd! I thought there would a scab
    follow.
  Con. I will owe thee an answer for that; and now forward with thy
    tale.
  Bora. Stand thee close then under this penthouse, for it drizzles
    rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.
  2. Watch. [aside] Some treason, masters. Yet stand close.
  Bora. Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.
  Con. Is it possible that any villany should be so dear?
  Bora. Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villany
    should be so rich; for when rich villains have need of poor ones,  
    poor ones may make what price they will.
  Con. I wonder at it.
  Bora. That shows thou art unconfirm'd. Thou knowest that the
    fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.
  Con. Yes, it is apparel.
  Bora. I mean the fashion.
  Con. Yes, the fashion is the fashion.
  Bora. Tush! I may as well say the fool's the fool. But seest thou
    not what a deformed thief this fashion is?
  2. Watch. [aside] I know that Deformed. 'A bas been a vile thief
    this seven year; 'a goes up and down like a gentleman. I remember
    his name.
  Bora. Didst thou not hear somebody?
  Con. No; 'twas the vane on the house.
  Bora. Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief this fashion is?
    how giddily 'a turns about all the hot-bloods between fourteen
    and five-and-thirty? sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoh's
    soldiers in the reechy painting, sometime like god Bel's priests
    in the old church window, sometime like the shaven Hercules in
    the smirch'd worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as  
    massy as his club?
  Con. All this I see; and I see that the fashion wears out more
    apparel than the man. But art not thou thyself giddy with the
    fashion too, that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling
    me of the fashion?
  Bora. Not so neither. But know that I have to-night wooed Margaret,
    the Lady Hero's gentlewoman, by the name of Hero. She leans me
    out at her mistress' chamber window, bids me a thousand times
    good night--I tell this tale vilely; I should first tell thee how
    the Prince, Claudio and my master, planted and placed and
    possessed by my master Don John, saw afar off in the orchard this
    amiable encounter.
  Con. And thought they Margaret was Hero?
  Bora. Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio; but the devil my
    master knew she was Margaret; and partly by his oaths, which
    first possess'd them, partly by the dark night, which did deceive
    them, but chiefly by my villany, which did confirm any slander
    that Don John had made, away went Claudio enrag'd; swore he would
    meet her, as he was appointed, next morning at the temple, and
    there, before the whole congregation, shame her with what he saw  
    o'ernight and send her home again without a husband.
  2. Watch. We charge you in the Prince's name stand!
  1. Watch. Call up the right Master Constable. We have here
    recover'd the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known
    in the commonwealth.
  2. Watch. And one Deformed is one of them. I know him; 'a wears a
    lock.
  Con. Masters, masters--
  1. Watch. You'll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.
  Con. Masters--
  2. Watch. Never speak, we charge you. Let us obey you to go with
    us.
  Bora. We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of
    these men's bills.
  Con. A commodity in question, I warrant you. Come, we'll obey you.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene IV.
A Room in Leonato's house.

Enter Hero, and Margaret and Ursula.

  Hero. Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice and desire her to rise.
  Urs. I will, lady.
  Hero. And bid her come hither.
  Urs. Well.                                             [Exit.]
  Marg. Troth, I think your other rebato were better.
  Hero. No, pray thee, good Meg, I'll wear this.
  Marg. By my troth, 's not so good, and I warrant your cousin will
    say so.
  Hero. My cousin's a fool, and thou art another. I'll wear none but
    this.
  Marg. I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a
    thought browner; and your gown's a most rare fashion, i' faith.
    I saw the Duchess of Milan's gown that they praise so.
  Hero. O, that exceeds, they say.
  Marg. By my troth, 's but a nightgown in respect of yours--
    cloth-o'-gold and cuts, and lac'd with silver, set with pearls
    down sleeves, side-sleeves, and skirts, round underborne with  
    a blush tinsel. But for a fine, quaint, graceful, and excellent
    fashion, yours is worth ten on't.
  Hero. God give me joy to wear it! for my heart is exceeding heavy.
  Marg. 'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.
  Hero. Fie upon thee! art not ashamed?
  Marg. Of what, lady? of speaking honourably? Is not marriage
    honourable in a beggar? Is not your lord honourable without
    marriage? I think you would have me say, 'saving your reverence,
    a husband.' An bad thinking do not wrest true speaking, I'll
    offend nobody. Is there any harm in 'the heavier for a husband'?
    None, I think, an it be the right husband and the right wife.
    Otherwise 'tis light, and not heavy. Ask my Lady Beatrice else.
    Here she comes.

                               Enter Beatrice.

  Hero. Good morrow, coz.
  Beat. Good morrow, sweet Hero.
  Hero. Why, how now? Do you speak in the sick tune?
  Beat. I am out of all other tune, methinks.  
  Marg. Clap's into 'Light o' love.' That goes without a burden. Do
    you sing it, and I'll dance it.
  Beat. Yea, 'Light o' love' with your heels! then, if your husband
    have stables enough, you'll see he shall lack no barnes.
  Marg. O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.
  Beat. 'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin; 'tis time you were ready.
    By my troth, I am exceeding ill. Hey-ho!
  Marg. For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
  Beat. For the letter that begins them all, H.
  Marg. Well, an you be not turn'd Turk, there's no more sailing by
    the star.
  Beat. What means the fool, trow?
  Marg. Nothing I; but God send every one their heart's desire!
  Hero. These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent
    perfume.
  Beat. I am stuff'd, cousin; I cannot smell.
  Marg. A maid, and stuff'd! There's goodly catching of cold.
  Beat. O, God help me! God help me! How long have you profess'd
    apprehension?
  Marg. Ever since you left it. Doth not my wit become me rarely?  
  Beat. It is not seen enough. You should wear it in your cap. By my
    troth, I am sick.
  Marg. Get you some of this distill'd carduus benedictus and lay it
    to your heart. It is the only thing for a qualm.
  Hero. There thou prick'st her with a thistle.
  Beat. Benedictus? why benedictus? You have some moral in this
    'benedictus.'
  Marg. Moral? No, by my troth, I have no moral meaning; I meant
    plain holy thistle. You may think perchance that I think you are
    in love. Nay, by'r lady, I am not such a fool to think what I
    list; nor I list not to think what I can; nor indeed I cannot
    think, if I would think my heart out of thinking, that you are in
    love, or that you will be in love, or that you can be in love.
    Yet Benedick was such another, and now is he become a man. He
    swore he would never marry; and yet now in despite of his heart
    he eats his meat without grudging; and how you may be converted I
    know not, but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do.
  Beat. What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?
  Marg. Not a false gallop.
  
                         Enter Ursula.

  Urs. Madam, withdraw. The Prince, the Count, Signior Benedick, Don
    John, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to
    church.
  Hero. Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.
                                                       [Exeunt.]




Scene V.
The hall in Leonato's house.

Enter Leonato and the Constable [Dogberry] and the Headborough [verges].

  Leon. What would you with me, honest neighbour?
  Dog. Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you that decerns
    you nearly.
  Leon. Brief, I pray you; for you see it is a busy time with me.
  Dog. Marry, this it is, sir.
  Verg. Yes, in truth it is, sir.
  Leon. What is it, my good friends?
  Dog. Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the matter--an old
    man, sir, and his wits are not so blunt as, God help, I would
    desire they were; but, in faith, honest as the skin between his
    brows.
  Verg. Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living that is an
    old man and no honester than I.
  Dog. Comparisons are odorous. Palabras, neighbour Verges.
  Leon. Neighbours, you are tedious.
  Dog. It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor Duke's  
    officers; but truly, for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a
    king, I could find in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.
  Leon. All thy tediousness on me, ah?
  Dog. Yea, in 'twere a thousand pound more than 'tis; for I hear as
    good exclamation on your worship as of any man in the city; and
    though I be but a poor man, I am glad to hear it.
  Verg. And so am I.
  Leon. I would fain know what you have to say.
  Verg. Marry, sir, our watch to-night, excepting your worship's
    presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in
    Messina.
  Dog. A good old man, sir; he will be talking. As they say, 'When
    the age is in, the wit is out.' God help us! it is a world to
    see! Well said, i' faith, neighbour Verges. Well, God's a good
    man. An two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind. An honest
    soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread; but
    God is to be worshipp'd; all men are not alike, alas, good
    neighbour!
  Leon. Indeed, neighbour, he comes too short of you.
  Dog. Gifts that God gives.  
  Leon. I must leave you.
  Dog. One word, sir. Our watch, sir, have indeed comprehended two
    aspicious persons, and we would have them this morning examined
    before your worship.
  Leon. Take their examination yourself and bring it me. I am now in
    great haste, as it may appear unto you.
  Dog. It shall be suffigance.
  Leon. Drink some wine ere you go. Fare you well.

                       [Enter a Messenger.]

  Mess. My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her
    husband.
  Leon. I'll wait upon them. I am ready.
                                 [Exeunt Leonato and Messenger.]
  Dog. Go, good partner, go get you to Francis Seacoal; bid him bring
    his pen and inkhorn to the jail. We are now to examination these
    men.
  Verg. And we must do it wisely.
  Dog. We will spare for no wit, I warrant you. Here's that shall  
    drive some of them to a non-come. Only get the learned writer to
    set down our excommunication, and meet me at the jail.
                                                       [Exeunt.]




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. Scene I.
A church.

Enter Don Pedro, [John the] Bastard, Leonato, Friar [Francis], Claudio,
Benedick, Hero, Beatrice, [and Attendants].

  Leon. Come, Friar Francis, be brief. Only to the plain form of
    marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties
    afterwards.
  Friar. You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady?
  Claud. No.
  Leon. To be married to her. Friar, you come to marry her.
  Friar. Lady, you come hither to be married to this count?
  Hero. I do.
  Friar. If either of you know any inward impediment why you should
    not be conjoined, I charge you on your souls to utter it.
  Claud. Know you any, Hero?
  Hero. None, my lord.
  Friar. Know you any, Count?
  Leon. I dare make his answer--none.
  Claud. O, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do, not
    knowing what they do!  
  Bene. How now? interjections? Why then, some be of laughing, as,
    ah, ha, he!
  Claud. Stand thee by, friar. Father, by your leave:
    Will you with free and unconstrained soul
    Give me this maid your daughter?
  Leon. As freely, son, as God did give her me.
  Claud. And what have I to give you back whose worth
    May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
  Pedro. Nothing, unless you render her again.
  Claud. Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.
    There, Leonato, take her back again.
    Give not this rotten orange to your friend.
    She's but the sign and semblance of her honour.
    Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
    O, what authority and show of truth
    Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
    Comes not that blood as modest evidence
    To witness simple virtue, Would you not swear,
    All you that see her, that she were a maid
    By these exterior shows? But she is none:  
    She knows the heat of a luxurious bed;
    Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
  Leon. What do you mean, my lord?
  Claud. Not to be married,
    Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.
  Leon. Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof,
    Have vanquish'd the resistance of her youth
    And made defeat of her virginity--
  Claud. I know what you would say. If I have known her,
    You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
    And so extenuate the forehand sin.
    No, Leonato,
    I never tempted her with word too large,
    But, as a brother to his sister, show'd
    Bashful sincerity and comely love.
  Hero. And seem'd I ever otherwise to you?
  Claud. Out on the seeming! I will write against it.
    You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
    As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown;
    But you are more intemperate in your blood  
    Than Venus, or those pamp'red animals
    That rage in savage sensuality.
  Hero. Is my lord well that he doth speak so wide?
  Leon. Sweet Prince, why speak not you?
  Pedro. What should I speak?
    I stand dishonour'd that have gone about
    To link my dear friend to a common stale.
  Leon. Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
  John. Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
  Bene. This looks not like a nuptial.
  Hero. 'True!' O God!
  Claud. Leonato, stand I here?
    Is this the Prince, Is this the Prince's brother?
    Is this face Hero's? Are our eyes our own?
  Leon. All this is so; but what of this, my lord?
  Claud. Let me but move one question to your daughter,
    And by that fatherly and kindly power
    That you have in her, bid her answer truly.
  Leon. I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
  Hero. O, God defend me! How am I beset!  
    What kind of catechising call you this?
  Claud. To make you answer truly to your name.
  Hero. Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
    With any just reproach?
  Claud. Marry, that can Hero!
    Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.
    What man was he talk'd with you yesternight,
    Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
    Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.
  Hero. I talk'd with no man at that hour, my lord.
  Pedro. Why, then are you no maiden. Leonato,
    I am sorry you must hear. Upon my honour,
    Myself, my brother, and this grieved Count
    Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night
    Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window,
    Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
    Confess'd the vile encounters they have had
    A thousand times in secret.
  John. Fie, fie! they are not to be nam'd, my lord--
    Not to be spoke of;  
    There is not chastity, enough in language
    Without offence to utter them. Thus, pretty lady,
    I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
  Claud. O Hero! what a Hero hadst thou been
    If half thy outward graces had been plac'd
    About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
    But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! Farewell,
    Thou pure impiety and impious purity!
    For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love,
    And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
    To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
    And never shall it more be gracious.
  Leon. Hath no man's dagger here a point for me?
                                                  [Hero swoons.]
  Beat. Why, how now, cousin? Wherefore sink you down?
  John. Come let us go. These things, come thus to light,
    Smother her spirits up.
                      [Exeunt Don Pedro, Don Juan, and Claudio.]
  Bene. How doth the lady?
  Beat. Dead, I think. Help, uncle!  
    Hero! why, Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar!
  Leon. O Fate, take not away thy heavy hand!
    Death is the fairest cover for her shame
    That may be wish'd for.
  Beat. How now, cousin Hero?
  Friar. Have comfort, lady.
  Leon. Dost thou look up?
  Friar. Yea, wherefore should she not?
  Leon. Wherefore? Why, doth not every earthly thing
    Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
    The story that is printed in her blood?
    Do not live, Hero; do not ope thine eyes;
    For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die,
    Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
    Myself would on the rearward of reproaches
    Strike at thy life. Griev'd I, I had but one?
    Child I for that at frugal nature's frame?
    O, one too much by thee! Why had I one?
    Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
    Why had I not with charitable hand  
    Took up a beggar's issue at my gates,
    Who smirched thus and mir'd with infamy,
    I might have said, 'No part of it is mine;
    This shame derives itself from unknown loins'?
    But mine, and mine I lov'd, and mine I prais'd,
    And mine that I was proud on--mine so much
    That I myself was to myself not mine,
    Valuing of her--why, she, O, she is fall'n
    Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
    Hath drops too few to wash her clean again,
    And salt too little which may season give
    To her foul tainted flesh!
  Bene. Sir, sir, be patient.
    For my part, I am so attir'd in wonder,
    I know not what to say.
  Beat. O, on my soul, my cousin is belied!
  Bene. Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
  Beat. No, truly, not; although, until last night,
    I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow
  Leon. Confirm'd, confirm'd! O, that is stronger made  
    Which was before barr'd up with ribs of iron!
    Would the two princes lie? and Claudio lie,
    Who lov'd her so that, speaking of her foulness,
    Wash'd it with tears? Hence from her! let her die.
  Friar. Hear me a little;
    For I have only been silent so long,
    And given way unto this course of fortune,
    By noting of the lady. I have mark'd
    A thousand blushing apparitions
    To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames
    In angel whiteness beat away those blushes,
    And in her eye there hath appear'd a fire
    To burn the errors that these princes hold
    Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool;
    Trust not my reading nor my observation,
    Which with experimental seal doth warrant
    The tenure of my book; trust not my age,
    My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
    If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here
    Under some biting error.  
  Leon. Friar, it cannot be.
    Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
    Is that she will not add to her damnation
    A sin of perjury: she not denies it.
    Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse
    That which appears in proper nakedness?
  Friar. Lady, what man is he you are accus'd of?
  Hero. They know that do accuse me; I know none.
    If I know more of any man alive
    Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
    Let all my sins lack mercy! O my father,
    Prove you that any man with me convers'd
    At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
    Maintain'd the change of words with any creature,
    Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
  Friar. There is some strange misprision in the princes.
  Bene. Two of them have the very bent of honour;
    And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
    The practice of it lives in John the bastard,
    Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies.  
  Leon. I know not. If they speak but truth of her,
    These hands shall tear her. If they wrong her honour,
    The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
    Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
    Nor age so eat up my invention,
    Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
    Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
    But they shall find awak'd in such a kind
    Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
    Ability in means, and choice of friends,
    To quit me of them throughly.
  Friar. Pause awhile
    And let my counsel sway you in this case.
    Your daughter here the princes left for dead,
    Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
    And publish it that she is dead indeed;
    Maintain a mourning ostentation,
    And on your family's old monument
    Hang mournful epitaphs, and do all rites
    That appertain unto a burial.  
  Leon. What shall become of this? What will this do?
  Friar. Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
    Change slander to remorse. That is some good.
    But not for that dream I on this strange course,
    But on this travail look for greater birth.
    She dying, as it must be so maintain'd,
    Upon the instant that she was accus'd,
    Shall be lamented, pitied, and excus'd
    Of every hearer; for it so falls out
    That what we have we prize not to the worth
    Whiles we enjoy it, but being lack'd and lost,
    Why, then we rack the value, then we find
    The virtue that possession would not show us
    Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio.
    When he shall hear she died upon his words,
    Th' idea of her life shall sweetly creep
    Into his study of imagination,
    And every lovely organ of her life
    Shall come apparell'd in more precious habit,
    More moving, delicate, and full of life,  
    Into the eye and prospect of his soul
    Than when she liv'd indeed. Then shall he mourn
    (If ever love had interest in his liver)
    And wish he had not so accused her--
    No, though be thought his accusation true.
    Let this be so, and doubt not but success
    Will fashion the event in better shape
    Than I can lay it down in likelihood.
    But if all aim but this be levell'd false,
    The supposition of the lady's death
    Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
    And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
    As best befits her wounded reputation,
    In some reclusive and religious life,
    Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.
  Bene. Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you;
    And though you know my inwardness and love
    Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio,
    Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this
    As secretly and justly as your soul  
    Should with your body.
  Leon. Being that I flow in grief,
    The smallest twine may lead me.
  Friar. 'Tis well consented. Presently away;
    For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.
    Come, lady, die to live. This wedding day
    Perhaps is but prolong'd. Have patience and endure.
                         Exeunt [all but Benedick and Beatrice].
  Bene. Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?
  Beat. Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
  Bene. I will not desire that.
  Beat. You have no reason. I do it freely.
  Bene. Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
  Beat. Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right
     her!
  Bene. Is there any way to show such friendship?
  Beat. A very even way, but no such friend.
  Bene. May a man do it?
  Beat. It is a man's office, but not yours.
  Bene. I do love nothing in the world so well as you. Is not that  
    strange?
  Beat. As strange as the thing I know not. It were as possible for
    me to say I loved nothing so well as you. But believe me not; and
    yet I lie not. I confess nothing, nor I deny nothing. I am sorry
    for my cousin.
  Bene. By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.
  Beat. Do not swear, and eat it.
  Bene. I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat
    it that says I love not you.
  Beat. Will you not eat your word?
  Bene. With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest I love
    thee.
  Beat. Why then, God forgive me!
  Bene. What offence, sweet Beatrice?
  Beat. You have stayed me in a happy hour. I was about to protest I
    loved you.
  Bene. And do it with all thy heart.
  Beat. I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to
    protest.
  Bene. Come, bid me do anything for thee.  
  Beat. Kill Claudio.
  Bene. Ha! not for the wide world!
  Beat. You kill me to deny it. Farewell.
  Bene. Tarry, sweet Beatrice.
  Beat. I am gone, though I am here. There is no love in you. Nay, I
    pray you let me go.
  Bene. Beatrice--
  Beat. In faith, I will go.
  Bene. We'll be friends first.
  Beat. You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine
    enemy.
  Bene. Is Claudio thine enemy?
  Beat. Is 'a not approved in the height a villain, that hath
    slandered, scorned, dishonoured my kinswoman? O that I were a
    man! What? bear her in hand until they come to take hands, and
    then with public accusation, uncover'd slander, unmitigated
    rancour--O God, that I were a man! I would eat his heart in the
    market place.
  Bene. Hear me, Beatrice!
  Beat. Talk with a man out at a window!-a proper saying!  
  Bene. Nay but Beatrice--
  Beat. Sweet Hero! she is wrong'd, she is sland'red, she is undone.
  Bene. Beat--
  Beat. Princes and Counties! Surely a princely testimony, a goodly
    count, Count Comfect, a sweet gallant surely! O that I were a man
    for his sake! or that I had any friend would be a man for my
    sake! But manhood is melted into cursies, valour into compliment,
    and men are only turn'd into tongue, and trim ones too. He is now
    as valiant as Hercules that only tells a lie,and swears it. I
    cannot be a man with wishing; therefore I will die a woman with
    grieving.
  Bene. Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.
  Beat. Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.
  Bene. Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wrong'd Hero?
  Beat. Yea, as sure is I have a thought or a soul.
  Bene. Enough, I am engag'd, I will challenge him. I will kiss your
    hand, and so I leave you. By this hand, Claudio shall render me a
    dear account. As you hear of me, so think of me. Go comfort your
    cousin. I must say she is dead-and so farewell.
                                                       [Exeunt.]




Scene II.
A prison.

Enter the Constables [Dogberry and Verges] and the Sexton, in gowns,
[and the Watch, with Conrade and] Borachio.

  Dog. Is our whole dissembly appear'd?
  Verg. O, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
  Sex. Which be the malefactors?
  Dog. Marry, that am I and my partner.
  Verg. Nay, that's certain. We have the exhibition to examine.
  Sex. But which are the offenders that are to be examined? let them
    come before Master Constable.
  Dog. Yea, marry, let them come before me. What is your name,
    friend?
  Bor. Borachio.
  Dog. Pray write down Borachio. Yours, sirrah?
  Con. I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.
  Dog. Write down Master Gentleman Conrade. Masters, do you serve
    God?
  Both. Yea, sir, we hope.
  Dog. Write down that they hope they serve God; and write God first,  
    for God defend but God should go before such villains! Masters,
    it is proved already that you are little better than false
    knaves, and it will go near to be thought so shortly. How answer
    you for yourselves?
  Con. Marry, sir, we say we are none.
  Dog. A marvellous witty fellow, I assure you; but I will go about
    with him. Come you hither, sirrah. A word in your ear. Sir, I say
    to you, it is thought you are false knaves.
  Bora. Sir, I say to you we are none.
  Dog. Well, stand aside. Fore God, they are both in a tale.
    Have you writ down that they are none?
  Sex. Master Constable, you go not the way to examine. You must call
    forth the watch that are their accusers.
  Dog. Yea, marry, that's the eftest way. Let the watch come forth.
    Masters, I charge you in the Prince's name accuse these men.
  1. Watch. This man said, sir, that Don John the Prince's brother
    was a villain.
  Dog. Write down Prince John a villain. Why, this is flat perjury,
    to call a prince's brother villain.
  Bora. Master Constable--  
  Dog. Pray thee, fellow, peace. I do not like thy look, I promise
    thee.
  Sex. What heard you him say else?
  2. Watch. Marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of Don John
    for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.
  Dog. Flat burglary as ever was committed.
  Verg. Yea, by th' mass, that it is.
  Sex. What else, fellow?
  1. Watch. And that Count Claudio did mean, upon his words, to
    disgrace Hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.
  Dog. O villain! thou wilt be condemn'd into everlasting redemption
    for this.
  Sex. What else?
  Watchmen. This is all.
  Sex. And this is more, masters, than you can deny. Prince John is
    this morning secretly stol'n away. Hero was in this manner
    accus'd, in this manner refus'd, and upon the grief of this
    suddenly died. Master Constable, let these men be bound and
    brought to Leonato's. I will go before and show him their
    examination.                                         [Exit.]  
  Dog. Come, let them be opinion'd.
  Verg. Let them be in the hands--
  Con. Off, coxcomb!
  Dog. God's my life, where's the sexton? Let him write down the
    Prince's officer coxcomb. Come, bind them.--Thou naughty varlet!
  Con. Away! you are an ass, you are an ass.
  Dog. Dost thou not suspect my place? Dost thou not suspect my
    years? O that he were here to write me down an ass! But, masters,
    remember that I am an ass. Though it be not written down, yet
    forget not that I am an ass. No, thou villain, thou art full of
    piety, as shall be prov'd upon thee by good witness. I am a wise
    fellow; and which is more, an officer; and which is more, a
    householder; and which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any
    is in Messina, and one that knows the law, go to! and a rich
    fellow enough, go to! and a fellow that hath had losses; and one
    that hath two gowns and everything handsome about him. Bring him
    away. O that I had been writ down an ass!
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. Scene I.
The street, near Leonato's house.

Enter Leonato and his brother [ Antonio].

  Ant. If you go on thus, you will kill yourself,
    And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief
    Against yourself.
  Leon. I pray thee cease thy counsel,
    Which falls into mine ears as profitless
    As water in a sieve. Give not me counsel,
    Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
    But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
    Bring me a father that so lov'd his child,
    Whose joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine,
    And bid him speak to me of patience.
    Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
    And let it answer every strain for strain,
    As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
    In every lineament, branch, shape, and form.
    If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
    Bid sorrow wag, cry 'hem' when he should groan,  
    Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
    With candle-wasters--bring him yet to me,
    And I of him will gather patience.
    But there is no such man; for, brother, men
    Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
    Which they themselves not feel; but, tasting it,
    Their counsel turns to passion, which before
    Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
    Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
    Charm ache with air and agony with words.
    No, no! 'Tis all men's office to speak patience
    To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
    But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
    To be so moral when he shall endure
    The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel.
    My griefs cry louder than advertisement.
  Ant. Therein do men from children nothing differ.
  Leon. I pray thee peace. I will be flesh and blood;
    For there was never yet philosopher
    That could endure the toothache patiently,  
    However they have writ the style of gods
    And made a push at chance and sufferance.
  Ant. Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.
    Make those that do offend you suffer too.
  Leon. There thou speak'st reason. Nay, I will do so.
    My soul doth tell me Hero is belied;
    And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince,
    And all of them that thus dishonour her.

              Enter Don Pedro and Claudio.

  Ant. Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.
  Pedro. Good den, Good den.
  Claud. Good day to both of you.
  Leon. Hear you, my lords!
  Pedro. We have some haste, Leonato.
  Leon. Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord.
    Are you so hasty now? Well, all is one.
  Pedro. Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
  Ant. If he could right himself with quarrelling,  
    Some of us would lie low.
  Claud. Who wrongs him?
  Leon. Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou!
    Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword;
    I fear thee not.
  Claud. Mary, beshrew my hand
    If it should give your age such cause of fear.
    In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.
  Leon. Tush, tush, man! never fleer and jest at me
    I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
    As under privilege of age to brag
    What I have done being young, or what would do,
    Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head,
    Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me
    That I am forc'd to lay my reverence by
    And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
    Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
    I say thou hast belied mine innocent child;
    Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
    And she lied buried with her ancestors-  
    O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
    Save this of hers, fram'd by thy villany!
  Claud. My villany?
  Leon. Thine, Claudio; thine I say.
  Pedro. You say not right, old man
  Leon. My lord, my lord,
    I'll prove it on his body if he dare,
    Despite his nice fence and his active practice,
    His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.
  Claud. Away! I will not have to do with you.
  Leon. Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill'd my child.
    If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
    And. He shall kill two of us, and men indeed
    But that's no matter; let him kill one first.
    Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.
    Come, follow me, boy,. Come, sir boy, come follow me.
    Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence!
    Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
  Leon. Brother--
  Ant. Content yourself. God knows I lov'd my niece,  
    And she is dead, slander'd to death by villains,
    That dare as well answer a man indeed
    As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.
    Boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!
  Leon. Brother Anthony--
  Ant. Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
    And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
    Scambling, outfacing, fashion-monging boys,
    That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
    Go anticly, show outward hideousness,
    And speak off half a dozen dang'rous words,
    How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
    And this is all.
  Leon. But, brother Anthony--
  Ant. Come, 'tis no matter.
    Do not you meddle; let me deal in this.
  Pedro. Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
    My heart is sorry for your daughter's death;
    But, on my honour, she was charg'd with nothing
    But what was true, and very full of proof.  
  Leon. My lord, my lord--
  Pedro. I will not hear you.
  Leon. No? Come, brother, away!--I will be heard.
  Ant. And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
                                                    Exeunt ambo.

                  Enter Benedick.

  Pedro. See, see! Here comes the man we went to seek.
  Claud. Now, signior, what news?
  Bene. Good day, my lord.
  Pedro. Welcome, signior. You are almost come to part almost a fray.
  Claud. We had lik'd to have had our two noses snapp'd off with two
    old men without teeth.
  Pedro. Leonato and his brother. What think'st thou? Had we fought,
    I doubt we should have been too young for them.
  Bene. In a false quarrel there is no true valour. I came to seek
    you both.
  Claud. We have been up and down to seek thee; for we are high-proof
    melancholy, and would fain have it beaten away. Wilt thou use thy  
    wit?
  Bene. It is in my scabbard. Shall I draw it?
  Pedro. Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?
  Claud. Never any did so, though very many have been beside their
    wit. I will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrel--draw to
    pleasure us.
  Pedro. As I am an honest man, he looks pale. Art thou sick or
    angry?
  Claud. What, courage, man! What though care kill'd a cat, thou hast
    mettle enough in thee to kill care.
  Bene. Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career an you charge it
    against me. I pray you choose another subject.
  Claud. Nay then, give him another staff; this last was broke cross.
  Pedro. By this light, he changes more and more. I think he be angry
    indeed.
  Claud. If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.
  Bene. Shall I speak a word in your ear?
  Claud. God bless me from a challenge!
  Bene. [aside to Claudio] You are a villain. I jest not; I will make
    it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare. Do  
    me right, or I will protest your cowardice. You have kill'd a
    sweet lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me hear
    from you.
  Claud. Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.
  Pedro. What, a feast, a feast?
  Claud. I' faith, I thank him, he hath bid me to a calve's head and
    a capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my
    knife's naught. Shall I not find a woodcock too?
  Bene. Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.
  Pedro. I'll tell thee how Beatrice prais'd thy wit the other day. I
    said thou hadst a fine wit: 'True,' said she, 'a fine little
    one.' 'No,' said I, 'a great wit.' 'Right,' says she, 'a great
    gross one.' 'Nay,' said I, 'a good wit.' 'Just,' said she, 'it
    hurts nobody.' 'Nay,' said I, 'the gentleman is wise.' 'Certain,'
    said she, a wise gentleman.' 'Nay,' said I, 'he hath the
    tongues.' 'That I believe' said she, 'for he swore a thing to me
    on Monday night which he forswore on Tuesday morning. There's a
    double tongue; there's two tongues.' Thus did she an hour
    together transshape thy particular virtues. Yet at last she
    concluded with a sigh, thou wast the proper'st man in Italy.  
  Claud. For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.
  Pedro. Yea, that she did; but yet, for all that, an if she did not
    hate him deadly, she would love him dearly. The old man's
    daughter told us all.
  Claud. All, all! and moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the
    garden.
  Pedro. But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the
    sensible Benedick's head?
  Claud. Yea, and text underneath, 'Here dwells Benedick, the married
    man'?
  Bene. Fare you well, boy; you know my mind. I will leave you now to
    your gossiplike humour. You break jests as braggards do their
    blades, which God be thanked hurt not. My lord, for your many
    courtesies I thank you. I must discontinue your company. Your
    brother the bastard is fled from Messina. You have among you
    kill'd a sweet and innocent lady. For my Lord Lackbeard there, he
    and I shall meet; and till then peace be with him.
                                                         [Exit.]
  Pedro. He is in earnest.
  Claud. In most profound earnest; and, I'll warrant you, for the  
    love of Beatrice.
  Pedro. And hath challeng'd thee.
  Claud. Most sincerely.
  Pedro. What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and
    hose and leaves off his wit!

  Enter Constables [Dogberry and Verges, with the Watch, leading]
                      Conrade and Borachio.

  Claud. He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to
    such a man.
  Pedro. But, soft you, let me be! Pluck up, my heart, and be sad!
    Did he not say my brother was fled?
  Dog. Come you, sir. If justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er
    weigh more reasons in her balance. Nay, an you be a cursing
    hypocrite once, you must be look'd to.
  Pedro. How now? two of my brother's men bound? Borachio one.
  Claud. Hearken after their offence, my lord.
  Pedro. Officers, what offence have these men done?
  Dog. Marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they  
    have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and
    lastly, they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified
    unjust things; and to conclude, they are lying knaves.
  Pedro. First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I ask thee
    what's their offence; sixth and lastly, why they are committed;
    and to conclude, what you lay to their charge.
  Claud. Rightly reasoned, and in his own division; and by my troth
    there's one meaning well suited.
  Pedro. Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to
    your answer? This learned constable is too cunning to be
    understood. What's your offence?
  Bora. Sweet Prince, let me go no farther to mine answer. Do you
    hear me, and let this Count kill me. I have deceived even your
    very eyes. What your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow
    fools have brought to light, who in the night overheard me
    confessing to this man, how Don John your brother incensed me to
    slander the Lady Hero; how you were brought into the orchard and
    saw me court Margaret in Hero's garments; how you disgrac'd her
    when you should marry her. My villany they have upon record,
    which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my  
    shame. The lady is dead upon mine and my master's false
    accusation; and briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a
    villain.
  Pedro. Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
  Claud. I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it.
  Pedro. But did my brother set thee on to this?
  Bora. Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.
  Pedro. He is compos'd and fram'd of treachery,
    And fled he is upon this villany.
  Claud. Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear
    In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first.
  Dog. Come, bring away the plaintiffs. By this time our sexton hath
    reformed Signior Leonato of the matter. And, masters, do not
    forget to specify, when time and place shall serve, that I am an
    ass.
  Verg. Here, here comes Master Signior Leonato, and the sexton too.

          Enter Leonato, his brother [Antonio], and the Sexton.

  Leon. Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,  
    That, when I note another man like him,
    I may avoid him. Which of these is he?
  Bora. If you would know your wronger, look on me.
  Leon. Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd
    Mine innocent child?
  Bora. Yea, even I alone.
  Leon. No, not so, villain! thou beliest thyself.
    Here stand a pair of honourable men--
    A third is fled--that had a hand in it.
    I thank you princes for my daughter's death.
    Record it with your high and worthy deeds.
    'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.
  Claud. I know not how to pray your patience;
    Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself;
    Impose me to what penance your invention
    Can lay upon my sin. Yet sinn'd I not
    But in mistaking.
  Pedro. By my soul, nor I!
    And yet, to satisfy this good old man,
    I would bend under any heavy weight  
    That he'll enjoin me to.
  Leon. I cannot bid you bid my daughter live-
    That were impossible; but I pray you both,
    Possess the people in Messina here
    How innocent she died; and if your love
    Can labour aught in sad invention,
    Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb,
    And sing it to her bones--sing it to-night.
    To-morrow morning come you to my house,
    And since you could not be my son-in-law,
    Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter,
    Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
    And she alone is heir to both of us.
    Give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin,
    And so dies my revenge.
  Claud. O noble sir!
    Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me.
    I do embrace your offer; and dispose
    For henceforth of poor Claudio.
  Leon. To-morrow then I will expect your coming;  
    To-night I take my leave. This naughty man
    Shall fact to face be brought to Margaret,
    Who I believe was pack'd in all this wrong,
    Hir'd to it by your brother.
  Bora. No, by my soul, she was not;
    Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me;
    But always hath been just and virtuous
    In anything that I do know by her.
  Dog. Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this
    plaintiff here, the offender, did call me ass. I beseech you let
    it be rememb'red in his punishment. And also the watch heard them
    talk of one Deformed. They say he wears a key in his ear, and a
    lock hanging by it, and borrows money in God's name, the which he
    hath us'd so long and never paid that now men grow hard-hearted
    and will lend nothing for God's sake. Pray you examine him upon
    that point.
  Leon. I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
  Dog. Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent youth,
    and I praise God for you.
  Leon. There's for thy pains. [Gives money.]  
  Dog. God save the foundation!
  Leon. Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
  Dog. I leave an arrant knave with your worship, which I beseech
    your worship to correct yourself, for the example of others.
    God keep your worship! I wish your worship well. God restore you
    to health! I humbly give you leave to depart; and if a merry
    meeting may be wish'd, God prohibit it! Come, neighbour.
                                   Exeunt [Dogberry and Verges].
  Leon. Until to-morrow morning, lords, farewell.
  Ant. Farewell, my lords. We look for you to-morrow.
  Pedro. We will not fall.
  Claud. To-night I'll mourn with Hero.
                                 [Exeunt Don Pedro and Claudio.]
  Leon. [to the Watch] Bring you these fellows on.--We'll talk with
      Margaret,
    How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
Leonato's orchard.

Enter Benedick and Margaret [meeting].

  Bene. Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands
    by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.
  Marg. Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
  Bene. In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living shall come
    over it; for in most comely truth thou deservest it.
  Marg. To have no man come over me? Why, shall I always keep below
    stairs?
  Bene. Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth--it catches.
  Marg. And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils, which hit but hurt
    not.
  Bene. A most manly wit, Margaret: it will not hurt a woman.
    And so I pray thee call Beatrice. I give thee the bucklers.
  Marg. Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.
  Bene. If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a
    vice, and they are dangerous weapons for maids.
  Marg. Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
  Bene. And therefore will come.  
                                                  Exit Margaret.
       [Sings] The god of love,
               That sits above
           And knows me, and knows me,
             How pitiful I deserve--

    I mean in singing; but in loving Leander the good swimmer,
    Troilus the first employer of panders, and a whole book full of
    these quondam carpet-mongers, whose names yet run smoothly in the
    even road of a blank verse--why, they were never so truly turn'd
    over and over as my poor self in love. Marry, I cannot show it in
    rhyme. I have tried. I can find out no rhyme to 'lady' but 'baby'
    --an innocent rhyme; for 'scorn,' 'horn'--a hard rhyme; for
    'school', 'fool'--a babbling rhyme: very ominous endings! No, I
    was not born under a rhyming planet, nor cannot woo in festival
    terms.

                    Enter Beatrice.

    Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I call'd thee?  
  Beat. Yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.
  Bene. O, stay but till then!
  Beat. 'Then' is spoken. Fare you well now. And yet, ere I go, let
    me go with that I came for, which is, with knowing what hath
    pass'd between you and Claudio.
  Bene. Only foul words; and thereupon I will kiss thee.
  Beat. Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul
    breath, and foul breath is noisome. Therefore I will depart
    unkiss'd.
  Bene. Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so
    forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee plainly, Claudio
    undergoes my challenge; and either I must shortly hear from him
    or I will subscribe him a coward. And I pray thee now tell me,
    for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me?
  Beat. For them all together, which maintain'd so politic a state of
    evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with
    them. But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love
    for me?
  Bene. Suffer love!--a good epithet. I do suffer love indeed, for I
    love thee against my will.  
  Beat. In spite of your heart, I think. Alas, poor heart! If you
    spite it for my sake, I will spite it for yours, for I will never
    love that which my friend hates.
  Bene. Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.
  Beat. It appears not in this confession. There's not one wise man
    among twenty, that will praise himself.
  Bene. An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that liv'd in the time of
    good neighbours. If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb
    ere he dies, he shall live no longer in monument than the bell
    rings and the widow weeps.
  Beat. And how long is that, think you?
  Bene. Question: why, an hour in clamour and a quarter in rheum.
    Therefore is it most expedient for the wise, if Don Worm (his
    conscience) find no impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet
    of his own virtues, as I am to myself. So much for praising
    myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is praiseworthy. And now
    tell me, how doth your cousin?
  Beat. Very ill.
  Bene. And how do you?
  Beat. Very ill too.  
  Bene. Serve God, love me, and mend. There will I leave you too, for
    here comes one in haste.

                         Enter Ursula.

  Urs. Madam, you must come to your uncle. Yonder's old coil at home.
    It is proved my Lady Hero hath been falsely accus'd, the Prince
    and Claudio mightily abus'd, and Don John is the author of all,
    who is fled and gone. Will you come presently?
  Beat. Will you go hear this news, signior?
  Bene. I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried thy
    eyes; and moreover, I will go with thee to thy uncle's.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene III.
A churchyard.

Enter Claudio, Don Pedro, and three or four with tapers,
[followed by Musicians].

  Claud. Is this the monument of Leonato?
  Lord. It is, my lord.
  Claud. [reads from a scroll]

                      Epitaph.

        Done to death by slanderous tongues
          Was the Hero that here lies.
        Death, in guerdon of her wrongs,
          Gives her fame which never dies.
        So the life that died with shame
        Lives in death with glorious fame.

    Hang thou there upon the tomb,
                                          [Hangs up the scroll.]
    Praising her when I am dumb.  
    Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.

                     Song.

        Pardon, goddess of the night,
        Those that slew thy virgin knight;
        For the which, with songs of woe,
        Round about her tomb they go.
        Midnight, assist our moan,
        Help us to sigh and groan
          Heavily, heavily,
        Graves, yawn and yield your dead,
        Till death be uttered
          Heavily, heavily.

  Claud. Now unto thy bones good night!
    Yearly will I do this rite.
  Pedro. Good morrow, masters. Put your torches out.
    The wolves have prey'd, and look, the gentle day,
    Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about  
    Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.
    Thanks to you all, and leave us. Fare you well.
  Claud. Good morrow, masters. Each his several way.
  Pedro. Come, let us hence and put on other weeds,
    And then to Leonato's we will go.
  Claud. And Hymen now with luckier issue speeds
    Than this for whom we rend'red up this woe.          Exeunt.




Scene IV
The hall in Leonato's house.

Enter Leonato, Benedick, [Beatrice,] Margaret, Ursula, Antonio,
Friar [Francis], Hero.

  Friar. Did I not tell you she was innocent?
  Leon. So are the Prince and Claudio, who accus'd her
    Upon the error that you heard debated.
    But Margaret was in some fault for this,
    Although against her will, as it appears
    In the true course of all the question.
  Ant. Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.
  Bene. And so am I, being else by faith enforc'd
    To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
  Leon. Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
    Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
    And when I send for you, come hither mask'd.
                                                  Exeunt Ladies.
    The Prince and Claudio promis'd by this hour
    To visit me. You know your office, brother:
    You must be father to your brother's daughter,  
    And give her to young Claudio.
  Ant. Which I will do with confirm'd countenance.
  Bene. Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
  Friar. To do what, signior?
  Bene. To bind me, or undo me--one of them.
    Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
    Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.
  Leon. That eye my daughter lent her. 'Tis most true.
  Bene. And I do with an eye of love requite her.
  Leon. The sight whereof I think you had from me,
    From Claudio, and the Prince; but what's your will?
  Bene. Your answer, sir, is enigmatical;
    But, for my will, my will is, your good will
    May stand with ours, this day to be conjoin'd
    In the state of honourable marriage;
    In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.
  Leon. My heart is with your liking.
  Friar. And my help.

       Enter Don Pedro and Claudio and two or three other.  

    Here comes the Prince and Claudio.
  Pedro. Good morrow to this fair assembly.
  Leon. Good morrow, Prince; good morrow, Claudio.
    We here attend you. Are you yet determin'd
    To-day to marry with my brother's daughter?
  Claud. I'll hold my mind, were she an Ethiope.
  Leon. Call her forth, brother. Here's the friar ready.
                                                 [Exit Antonio.]
  Pedro. Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what's the matter
    That you have such a February face,
    So full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness?
  Claud. I think he thinks upon the savage bull.
    Tush, fear not, man! We'll tip thy horns with gold,
    And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
    As once Europa did at lusty Jove
    When he would play the noble beast in love.
  Bene. Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low,
    And some such strange bull leap'd your father's cow
    And got a calf in that same noble feat  
    Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.

       Enter [Leonato's] brother [Antonio], Hero, Beatrice,
            Margaret, Ursula, [the ladies wearing masks].

  Claud. For this I owe you. Here comes other reckonings.
    Which is the lady I must seize upon?
  Ant. This same is she, and I do give you her.
  Claud. Why then, she's mine. Sweet, let me see your face.
  Leon. No, that you shall not till you take her hand
    Before this friar and swear to marry her.
  Claud. Give me your hand before this holy friar.
    I am your husband if you like of me.
  Hero. And when I liv'd I was your other wife;       [Unmasks.]
    And when you lov'd you were my other husband.
  Claud. Another Hero!
  Hero. Nothing certainer.
    One Hero died defil'd; but I do live,
    And surely as I live, I am a maid.
  Pedro. The former Hero! Hero that is dead!  
  Leon. She died, my lord, but whiles her slander liv'd.
  Friar. All this amazement can I qualify,
    When, after that the holy rites are ended,
    I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death.
    Meantime let wonder seem familiar,
    And to the chapel let us presently.
  Bene. Soft and fair, friar. Which is Beatrice?
  Beat. [unmasks] I answer to that name. What is your will?
  Bene. Do not you love me?
  Beat. Why, no; no more than reason.
  Bene. Why, then your uncle, and the Prince, and Claudio
    Have been deceived; for they swore you did.
  Beat. Do not you love me?
  Bene. Troth, no; no more than reason.
  Beat. Why, then my cousin, Margaret, and Ursula
    Are much deceiv'd; for they did swear you did.
  Bene. They swore that you were almost sick for me.
  Beat. They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.
  Bene. 'Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?
  Beat. No, truly, but in friendly recompense.  
  Leon. Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.
  Claud. And I'll be sworn upon't that he loves her;
    For here's a paper written in his hand,
    A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
    Fashion'd to Beatrice.
  Hero. And here's another,
    Writ in my cousin's hand, stol'n from her pocket,
    Containing her affection unto Benedick.
  Bene. A miracle! Here's our own hands against our hearts.
    Come, I will have thee; but, by this light, I take thee for pity.
  Beat. I would not deny you; but, by this good day, I yield upon
    great persuasion, and partly to save your life, for I was told
    you were in a consumption.
  Bene. Peace! I will stop your mouth.             [Kisses her.]
  Beat. I'll tell thee what, Prince: a college of wit-crackers cannot
    flout me out of my humour. Dost thou think I care for a satire or
    an epigram? No. If a man will be beaten with brains, 'a shall
    wear nothing handsome about him. In brief, since I do purpose to
    marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say
    against it; and therefore never flout at me for what I have said  
    against it; for man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion.
    For thy part, Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee; but in
    that thou art like to be my kinsman, live unbruis'd, and love my
    cousin.
  Claud. I had well hop'd thou wouldst have denied Beatrice, that I
    might have cudgell'd thee out of thy single life, to make thee a
    double-dealer, which out of question thou wilt be if my cousin do
    not look exceeding narrowly to thee.
  Bene. Come, come, we are friends. Let's have a dance ere we are
    married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels.
  Leon. We'll have dancing afterward.
  Bene. First, of my word! Therefore play, music. Prince, thou art
    sad. Get thee a wife, get thee a wife! There is no staff more
    reverent than one tipp'd with horn.

                       Enter Messenger.

  Mess. My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight,
    And brought with armed men back to Messina.
  Bene. Think not on him till to-morrow. I'll devise thee brave  
    punishments for him. Strike up, pipers!
                                                Dance. [Exeunt.]


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1605


THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO, MOOR OF VENICE

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  OTHELLO, the Moor, general of the Venetian forces
  DESDEMONA, his wife
  IAGO, ensign to Othello
  EMILIA, his wife, lady-in-waiting to Desdemona
  CASSIO, lieutenant to Othello
  THE DUKE OF VENICE
  BRABANTIO, Venetian Senator, father of Desdemona
  GRATIANO, nobleman of Venice, brother of Brabantio
  LODOVICO, nobleman of Venice, kinsman of Brabantio
  RODERIGO, rejected suitor of Desdemona
  BIANCA, mistress of Cassio
  MONTANO, a Cypriot official
  A Clown in service to Othello
  Senators, Sailors, Messengers, Officers, Gentlemen, Musicians, and
    Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE: Venice and Cyprus

ACT I. SCENE I.
Venice. A street.

Enter Roderigo and Iago.

  RODERIGO. Tush, never tell me! I take it much unkindly
    That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse
    As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
  IAGO. 'Sblood, but you will not hear me.
    If ever I did dream of such a matter,
    Abhor me.
  RODERIGO. Thou told'st me thou didst hold him in thy hate.
  IAGO. Despise me, if I do not. Three great ones of the city,
    In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
    Off-capp'd to him; and, by the faith of man,
    I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.
    But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
    Evades them, with a bumbast circumstance
    Horribly stuff'd with epithets of war,
    And, in conclusion,
    Nonsuits my mediators; for, "Certes," says he,
    "I have already chose my officer."  
    And what was he?
    Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
    One Michael Cassio, a Florentine
    (A fellow almost damn'd in a fair wife)
    That never set a squadron in the field,
    Nor the division of a battle knows
    More than a spinster; unless the bookish theoric,
    Wherein the toged consuls can propose
    As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice
    Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had the election;
    And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
    At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds
    Christian and heathen, must be belee'd and calm'd
    By debitor and creditor. This counter-caster,
    He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
    And I- God bless the mark!- his Moorship's ancient.
  RODERIGO. By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
  IAGO. Why, there's no remedy. 'Tis the curse of service,
    Preferment goes by letter and affection,
    And not by old gradation, where each second  
    Stood heir to the first. Now, sir, be judge yourself
    Whether I in any just term am affined
    To love the Moor.
  RODERIGO.           I would not follow him then.
  IAGO. O, sir, content you.
    I follow him to serve my turn upon him:
    We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
    Cannot be truly follow'd. You shall mark
    Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave,
    That doting on his own obsequious bondage
    Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
    For nought but provender, and when he's old, cashier'd.
    Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
    Who, trimm'd in forms and visages of duty,
    Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
    And throwing but shows of service on their lords
    Do well thrive by them; and when they have lined their coats
    Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,
    And such a one do I profess myself.
    For, sir,  
    It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
    Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago.
    In following him, I follow but myself;
    Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
    But seeming so, for my peculiar end.
    For when my outward action doth demonstrate
    The native act and figure of my heart
    In complement extern, 'tis not long after
    But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
    For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.
  RODERIGO. What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe,
    If he can carry't thus!
  IAGO.                     Call up her father,
    Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight,
    Proclaim him in the streets, incense her kinsmen,
    And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,
    Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy,
    Yet throw such changes of vexation on't
    As it may lose some color.
  RODERIGO. Here is her father's house; I'll call aloud.  
  IAGO. Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
    As when, by night and negligence, the fire
    Is spied in populous cities.
  RODERIGO. What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!
  IAGO. Awake! What, ho, Brabantio! Thieves! Thieves! Thieves!
    Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
    Thieves! Thieves!

                Brabantio appears above, at a window.

  BRABANTIO. What is the reason of this terrible summons?
    What is the matter there?
  RODERIGO. Signior, is all your family within?
  IAGO. Are your doors lock'd?
  BRABANTIO.                   Why? Wherefore ask you this?
  IAGO. 'Zounds, sir, you're robb'd! For shame, put on your gown;
    Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul;
    Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
    Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise!
    Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,  
    Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.
    Arise, I say!
  BRABANTIO. What, have you lost your wits?
  RODERIGO. Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
  BRABANTIO. Not I. What are you?
  RODERIGO. My name is Roderigo.
  BRABANTIO.                     The worser welcome.
    I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors.
    In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
    My daughter is not for thee; and now, in madness,
    Being full of supper and distempering draughts,
    Upon malicious bravery, dost thou come
    To start my quiet.
  RODERIGO. Sir, sir, sir-
  BRABANTIO.               But thou must needs be sure
    My spirit and my place have in them power
    To make this bitter to thee.
  RODERIGO.                      Patience, good sir.
  BRABANTIO. What tell'st thou me of robbing? This is Venice;
    My house is not a grange.  
  RODERIGO.                   Most grave Brabantio,
    In simple and pure soul I come to you.
  IAGO. 'Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God,
    if the devil bid you. Because we come to do you service and you
    think we are ruffians, you'll have your daughter covered with a
    Barbary horse; you'll have your nephews neigh to you; you'll have
    coursers for cousins, and gennets for germans.
  BRABANTIO. What profane wretch art thou?
  IAGO. I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the
    Moor are now making the beast with two backs.
  BRABANTIO. Thou are a villain.
  IAGO.                          You are- a senator.
  BRABANTIO. This thou shalt answer; I know thee, Roderigo.
  RODERIGO. Sir, I will answer anything. But, I beseech you,
    If't be your pleasure and most wise consent,
    As partly I find it is, that your fair daughter,
    At this odd-even and dull watch o' the night,
    Transported with no worse nor better guard
    But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
    To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor-  
    If this be known to you, and your allowance,
    We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs;
    But if you know not this, my manners tell me
    We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
    That, from the sense of all civility,
    I thus would play and trifle with your reverence.
    Your daughter, if you have not given her leave,
    I say again, hath made a gross revolt,
    Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
    In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
    Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself:
    If she be in her chamber or your house,
    Let loose on me the justice of the state
    For thus deluding you.
  BRABANTIO.               Strike on the tinder, ho!
    Give me a taper! Call up all my people!
    This accident is not unlike my dream;
    Belief of it oppresses me already.
    Light, I say, light!                                  Exit above.
  IAGO.                  Farewell, for I must leave you.  
    It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place,
    To be produced- as, if I stay, I shall-
    Against the Moor; for I do know, the state,
    However this may gall him with some check,
    Cannot with safety cast him, for he's embark'd
    With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,
    Which even now stands in act, that, for their souls,
    Another of his fathom they have none
    To lead their business; in which regard,
    Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,
    Yet for necessity of present life,
    I must show out a flag and sign of love,
    Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find him,
    Lead to the Sagittary the raised search,
    And there will I be with him. So farewell.                  Exit.

            Enter, below, Brabantio, in his nightgown, and
                        Servants with torches.

  BRABANTIO. It is too true an evil: gone she is,  
    And what's to come of my despised time
    Is nought but bitterness. Now, Roderigo,
    Where didst thou see her? O unhappy girl!
    With the Moor, say'st thou? Who would be a father!
    How didst thou know 'twas she? O, she deceives me
    Past thought! What said she to you? Get more tapers.
    Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?
  RODERIGO. Truly, I think they are.
  BRABANTIO. O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood!
    Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds
    By what you see them act. Is there not charms
    By which the property of youth and maidhood
    May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
    Of some such thing?
  RODERIGO.             Yes, sir, I have indeed.
  BRABANTIO. Call up my brother. O, would you had had her!
    Some one way, some another. Do you know
    Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
  RODERIGO. I think I can discover him, if you please
    To get good guard and go along with me.  
  BRABANTIO. Pray you, lead on. At every house I'll call;
    I may command at most. Get weapons, ho!
    And raise some special officers of night.
    On, good Roderigo, I'll deserve your pains.               Exeunt.




SCENE II.
Another street.

Enter Othello, Iago, and Attendants with torches.

  IAGO. Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
    Yet do I hold it very stuff o' the conscience
    To do no contrived murther. I lack iniquity
    Sometimes to do me service. Nine or ten times
    I had thought to have yerk'd him here under the ribs.
  OTHELLO. 'Tis better as it is.
  IAGO.                          Nay, but he prated
    And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
    Against your honor
    That, with the little godliness I have,
    I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir,
    Are you fast married? Be assured of this,
    That the magnifico is much beloved,
    And hath in his effect a voice potential
    As double as the Duke's. He will divorce you,
    Or put upon you what restraint and grievance
    The law, with all his might to enforce it on,  
    Will give him cable.
  OTHELLO.               Let him do his spite.
    My services, which I have done the signiory,
    Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know-
    Which, when I know that boasting is an honor,
    I shall promulgate- I fetch my life and being
    From men of royal siege, and my demerits
    May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
    As this that I have reach'd. For know, Iago,
    But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
    I would not my unhoused free condition
    Put into circumscription and confine
    For the sea's worth. But, look! What lights come yond?
  IAGO. Those are the raised father and his friends.
    You were best go in.
  OTHELLO.               Not I; I must be found.
    My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
    Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
  IAGO. By Janus, I think no.
  
           Enter Cassio and certain Officers with torches.

  OTHELLO. The servants of the Duke? And my lieutenant?
    The goodness of the night upon you, friends!
    What is the news?
  CASSIO.             The Duke does greet you, general,
    And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,
    Even on the instant.
  OTHELLO.               What is the matter, think you?
  CASSIO. Something from Cyprus, as I may divine;
    It is a business of some heat. The galleys
    Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
    This very night at one another's heels;
    And many of the consuls, raised and met,
    Are at the Duke's already. You have been hotly call'd for,
    When, being not at your lodging to be found,
    The Senate hath sent about three several quests
    To search you out.
  OTHELLO.             'Tis well I am found by you.
    I will but spend a word here in the house  
    And go with you.                                            Exit.
  CASSIO.            Ancient, what makes he here?
  IAGO. Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carack;
    If it prove lawful prize, he's made forever.
  CASSIO. I do not understand.
  IAGO.                        He's married.
  CASSIO.                                    To who?

                          Re-enter Othello.

  IAGO. Marry, to- Come, captain, will you go?
  OTHELLO.                                     Have with you.
  CASSIO. Here comes another troop to seek for you.
  IAGO. It is Brabantio. General, be advised,
    He comes to bad intent.

         Enter Brabantio, Roderigo, and Officers with torches
                             and weapons.

  OTHELLO.                  Holla! Stand there!  
  RODERIGO. Signior, it is the Moor.
  BRABANTIO.                         Down with him, thief!
                                             They draw on both sides.
  IAGO. You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.
  OTHELLO. Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.
    Good signior, you shall more command with years
    Than with your weapons.
  BRABANTIO. O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow'd my daughter?
    Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchanted her,
    For I'll refer me to all things of sense,
    If she in chains of magic were not bound,
    Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
    So opposite to marriage that she shunn'd
    The wealthy, curled darlings of our nation,
    Would ever have, to incur a general mock,
    Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
    Of such a thing as thou- to fear, not to delight.
    Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense
    That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms,
    Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals  
    That weaken motion. I'll have't disputed on;
    'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.
    I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
    For an abuser of the world, a practicer
    Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.
    Lay hold upon him. If he do resist,
    Subdue him at his peril.
  OTHELLO.                   Hold your hands,
    Both you of my inclining and the rest.
    Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
    Without a prompter. Where will you that I go
    To answer this your charge?
  BRABANTIO.                    To prison, till fit time
    Of law and course of direct session
    Call thee to answer.
  OTHELLO.               What if I do obey?
    How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
    Whose messengers are here about my side,
    Upon some present business of the state
    To bring me to him?  
  FIRST OFFICER.        'Tis true, most worthy signior;
    The Duke's in council, and your noble self,
    I am sure, is sent for.
  BRABANTIO.                How? The Duke in council?
    In this time of the night? Bring him away;
    Mine's not an idle cause. The Duke himself,
    Or any of my brothers of the state,
    Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own;
    For if such actions may have passage free,
    Bond slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.            Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A council chamber. The Duke and Senators sitting at a table;
Officers attending.

  DUKE. There is no composition in these news
    That gives them credit.
  FIRST SENATOR.            Indeed they are disproportion'd;
    My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
  DUKE. And mine, a hundred and forty.
  SECOND SENATOR.                      And mine, two hundred.
    But though they jump not on a just account-
    As in these cases, where the aim reports,
    'Tis oft with difference- yet do they all confirm
    A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
  DUKE. Nay, it is possible enough to judgement.
    I do not so secure me in the error,
    But the main article I do approve
    In fearful sense.
  SAILOR. [Within.] What, ho! What, ho! What, ho!
  FIRST OFFICER. A messenger from the galleys.

                            Enter Sailor.
  
  DUKE.                                Now, what's the business?
  SAILOR. The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes,
    So was I bid report here to the state
    By Signior Angelo.
  DUKE. How say you by this change?
  FIRST SENATOR.                    This cannot be,
    By no assay of reason; 'tis a pageant
    To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
    The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,
    And let ourselves again but understand
    That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
    So may he with more facile question bear it,
    For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
    But altogether lacks the abilities
    That Rhodes is dress'd in. If we make thought of this,
    We must not think the Turk is so unskillful
    To leave that latest which concerns him first,
    Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain,
    To wake and wage a danger profitless.
  DUKE. Nay, in all confidence, he's not for Rhodes.  
  FIRST OFFICER. Here is more news.

                          Enter a Messenger.

  MESSENGER. The Ottomites, reverend and gracious,
    Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
    Have there injointed them with an after fleet.
  FIRST SENATOR. Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?
  MESSENGER. Of thirty sail; and now they do re-stem
    Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
    Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
    Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
    With his free duty recommends you thus,
    And prays you to believe him.
  DUKE. 'Tis certain then for Cyprus.
    Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
  FIRST SENATOR. He's now in Florence.
  DUKE. Write from us to him, post-post-haste dispatch.
  FIRST SENATOR. Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
  
       Enter Brabantio, Othello, Iago, Roderigo, and Officers.

  DUKE. Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
    Against the general enemy Ottoman.
    [To Brabantio.] I did not see you; welcome, gentle signior;
    We lack'd your counsel and your help tonight.
  BRABANTIO. So did I yours. Good your Grace, pardon me:
    Neither my place nor aught I heard of business
    Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care
    Take hold on me; for my particular grief
    Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature
    That it engluts and swallows other sorrows,
    And it is still itself.
  DUKE.                     Why, what's the matter?
  BRABANTIO. My daughter! O, my daughter!
  ALL.                                    Dead?
  BRABANTIO.                                    Ay, to me.
    She is abused, stol'n from me and corrupted
    By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
    For nature so preposterously to err,  
    Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,
    Sans witchcraft could not.
  DUKE. Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding
    Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself
    And you of her, the bloody book of law
    You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
    After your own sense, yea, though our proper son
    Stood in your action.
  BRABANTIO.              Humbly I thank your Grace.
    Here is the man, this Moor, whom now, it seems,
    Your special mandate for the state affairs
    Hath hither brought.
  ALL.                   We are very sorry for't.
  DUKE. [To Othello.] What in your own part can you say to this?
  BRABANTIO. Nothing, but this is so.
  OTHELLO. Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
    My very noble and approved good masters,
    That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter,
    It is most true; true, I have married her;
    The very head and front of my offending  
    Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
    And little blest with the soft phrase of peace;
    For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith,
    Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used
    Their dearest action in the tented field,
    And little of this great world can I speak,
    More than pertains to feats of broil and battle;
    And therefore little shall I grace my cause
    In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience,
    I will a round unvarnish'd tale deliver
    Of my whole course of love: what drugs, what charms,
    What conjuration, and what mighty magic-
    For such proceeding I am charged withal-
    I won his daughter.
  BRABANTIO.            A maiden never bold,
    Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
    Blush'd at herself; and she- in spite of nature,
    Of years, of country, credit, everything-
    To fall in love with what she fear'd to look on!
    It is judgement maim'd and most imperfect,  
    That will confess perfection so could err
    Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
    To find out practices of cunning hell
    Why this should be. I therefore vouch again
    That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood,
    Or with some dram conjured to this effect,
    He wrought upon her.
  DUKE.                  To vouch this is no proof,
    Without more certain and more overt test
    Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
    Of modern seeming do prefer against him.
  FIRST SENATOR. But, Othello, speak.
    Did you by indirect and forced courses
    Subdue and poison this young maid's affections?
    Or came it by request, and such fair question
    As soul to soul affordeth?
  OTHELLO.                     I do beseech you,
    Send for the lady to the Sagittary,
    And let her speak of me before her father.
    If you do find me foul in her report,  
    The trust, the office I do hold of you,
    Not only take away, but let your sentence
    Even fall upon my life.
  DUKE.                     Fetch Desdemona hither.
  OTHELLO. Ancient, conduct them; you best know the place.
                                          Exeunt Iago and Attendants.
    And till she come, as truly as to heaven
    I do confess the vices of my blood,
    So justly to your grave ears I'll present
    How I did thrive in this fair lady's love
    And she in mine.
  DUKE. Say it, Othello.
  OTHELLO. Her father loved me, oft invited me,
    Still question'd me the story of my life
    From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes,
    That I have pass'd.
    I ran it through, even from my boyish days
    To the very moment that he bade me tell it:
    Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,
    Of moving accidents by flood and field,  
    Of hair-breadth 'scapes i' the imminent deadly breach,
    Of being taken by the insolent foe
    And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence
    And portance in my travels' history;
    Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
    Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,
    It was my hint to speak- such was the process-
    And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
    The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
    Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear
    Would Desdemona seriously incline;
    But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
    Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
    She'ld come again, and with a greedy ear
    Devour up my discourse; which I observing,
    Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
    To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
    That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
    Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
    But not intentively. I did consent,  
    And often did beguile her of her tears
    When I did speak of some distressful stroke
    That my youth suffer'd. My story being done,
    She gave me for my pains a world of sighs;
    She swore, in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;
    'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful.
    She wish'd she had not heard it, yet she wish'd
    That heaven had made her such a man; she thank'd me,
    And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
    I should but teach him how to tell my story,
    And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake:
    She loved me for the dangers I had pass'd,
    And I loved her that she did pity them.
    This only is the witchcraft I have used.
    Here comes the lady; let her witness it.

                Enter Desdemona, Iago, and Attendants.

  DUKE. I think this tale would win my daughter too.
    Good Brabantio,  
    Take up this mangled matter at the best:
    Men do their broken weapons rather use
    Than their bare hands.
  BRABANTIO.               I pray you, hear her speak.
    If she confess that she was half the wooer,
    Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
    Light on the man! Come hither, gentle mistress.
    Do you perceive in all this noble company
    Where most you owe obedience?
  DESDEMONA.                      My noble father,
    I do perceive here a divided duty.
    To you I am bound for life and education;
    My life and education both do learn me
    How to respect you; you are the lord of duty,
    I am hitherto your daughter. But here's my husband,
    And so much duty as my mother show'd
    To you, preferring you before her father,
    So much I challenge that I may profess
    Due to the Moor, my lord.
  BRABANTIO.                  God be with you! I have done.  
    Please it your Grace, on to the state affairs;
    I had rather to adopt a child than get it.
    Come hither, Moor.
    I here do give thee that with all my heart
    Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
    I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel,
    I am glad at soul I have no other child;
    For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
    To hang clogs on them. I have done, my lord.
  DUKE. Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence
    Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers
    Into your favor.
    When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
    By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
    To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
    Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
    What cannot be preserved when Fortune takes,
    Patience her injury a mockery makes.
    The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief;
    He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.  
  BRABANTIO. So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile;
    We lose it not so long as we can smile.
    He bears the sentence well, that nothing bears
    But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
    But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
    That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
    These sentences, to sugar or to gall,
    Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.
    But words are words; I never yet did hear
    That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear.
    I humbly beseech you, proceed to the affairs of state.
  DUKE. The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus.
    Othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you; and
    though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency,
    yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer
    voice on you. You must therefore be content to slubber the gloss
    of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boisterous
    expedition.
  OTHELLO. The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
    Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war  
    My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize
    A natural and prompt alacrity
    I find in hardness and do undertake
    These present wars against the Ottomites.
    Most humbly therefore bending to your state,
    I crave fit disposition for my wife,
    Due reference of place and exhibition,
    With such accommodation and besort
    As levels with her breeding.
  DUKE.                          If you please,
    Be't at her father's.
  BRABANTIO.              I'll not have it so.
  OTHELLO. Nor I.
  DESDEMONA.      Nor I. I would not there reside
    To put my father in impatient thoughts
    By being in his eye. Most gracious Duke,
    To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear,
    And let me find a charter in your voice
    To assist my simpleness.
  DUKE. What would you, Desdemona?  
  DESDEMONA. That I did love the Moor to live with him,
    My downright violence and storm of fortunes
    May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdued
    Even to the very quality of my lord.
    I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
    And to his honors and his valiant parts
    Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
    So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
    A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
    The rites for which I love him are bereft me,
    And I a heavy interim shall support
    By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
  OTHELLO. Let her have your voices.
    Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
    To please the palate of my appetite,
    Nor to comply with heat- the young affects
    In me defunct- and proper satisfaction;
    But to be free and bounteous to her mind.
    And heaven defend your good souls, that you think
    I will your serious and great business scant  
    For she is with me. No, when light-wing'd toys
    Of feather'd Cupid seel with wanton dullness
    My speculative and officed instruments,
    That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
    Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,
    And all indign and base adversities
    Make head against my estimation!
  DUKE. Be it as you shall privately determine,
    Either for her stay or going. The affair cries haste,
    And speed must answer't: you must hence tonight.
  DESDEMONA. Tonight, my lord?
  DUKE.                        This night.
  OTHELLO.                                 With all my heart.
  DUKE. At nine i' the morning here we'll meet again.
    Othello, leave some officer behind,
    And he shall our commission bring to you,
    With such things else of quality and respect
    As doth import you.
  OTHELLO.              So please your Grace, my ancient;
    A man he is of honesty and trust.  
    To his conveyance I assign my wife,
    With what else needful your good Grace shall think
    To be sent after me.
  DUKE.                  Let it be so.
    Good night to everyone. [To Brabantio.] And, noble signior,
    If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
    Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
  FIRST SENATOR. Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.
  BRABANTIO. Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see;
    She has deceived her father, and may thee.
                                 Exeunt Duke, Senators, and Officers.
  OTHELLO. My life upon her faith! Honest Iago,
    My Desdemona must I leave to thee.
    I prithee, let thy wife attend on her,
    And bring them after in the best advantage.
    Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
    Of love, of worldly matters and direction,
    To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
                                        Exeunt Othello and Desdemona.
  RODERIGO. Iago!  
  IAGO. What say'st thou, noble heart?
  RODERIGO. What will I do, thinkest thou?
  IAGO. Why, go to bed and sleep.
  RODERIGO. I will incontinently drown myself.
  IAGO. If thou dost, I shall never love thee after.
    Why, thou silly gentleman!
  RODERIGO. It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then
    have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.
  IAGO. O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times
    seven years, and since I could distinguish betwixt a benefit and
    an injury, I never found man that knew how to love himself. Ere I
    would say I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I
    would change my humanity with a baboon.
  RODERIGO. What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond,
    but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
  IAGO. Virtue? a fig! 'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus.
    Our bodies are gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners; so
    that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed
    up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with
    many, either to have it sterile with idleness or manured with  
    industry, why, the power and corrigible authority of this lies in
    our wills. If the balance of our lives had not one scale of
    reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of
    our natures would conduct us to most preposterous conclusions.
    But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings,
    our unbitted lusts; whereof I take this, that you call love, to
    be a sect or scion.
  RODERIGO. It cannot be.
  IAGO. It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the
    will. Come, be a man! Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind
    puppies. I have professed me thy friend, and I confess me knit to
    thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness; I could never
    better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse; follow thou
    the wars; defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. I say, put
    money in thy purse. It cannot be that Desdemona should long
    continue her love to the Moor- put money in thy purse- nor he his
    to her. It was a violent commencement, and thou shalt see an
    answerable sequestration- put but money in thy purse. These Moors
    are changeable in their wills- fill thy purse with money. The
    food that to him now is as luscious as locusts, shall be to him  
    shortly as acerb as the coloquintida. She must change for youth;
    when she is sated with his body, she will find the error of her
    choice. She must have change, she must; therefore put money in
    thy purse. If thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate
    way than drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If sanctimony
    and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and a supersubtle
    Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell,
    thou shalt enjoy her- therefore make money. A pox of drowning
    thyself! It is clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be
    hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without
    her.
  RODERIGO. Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?
  IAGO. Thou art sure of me- go, make money. I have told thee often,
    and I retell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is
    hearted; thine hath no less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our
    revenge against him. If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself
    a pleasure, me a sport. There are many events in the womb of time
    which will be delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will
    have more of this tomorrow. Adieu.
  RODERIGO. Where shall we meet i' the morning?  
  IAGO. At my lodging.
  RODERIGO. I'll be with thee betimes.
  IAGO. Go to, farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo?
  RODERIGO. What say you?
  IAGO. No more of drowning, do you hear?
  RODERIGO. I am changed; I'll go sell all my land.             Exit.
  IAGO. Thus do I ever make my fool my purse;
    For I mine own gain'd knowledge should profane
    If I would time expend with such a snipe
    But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,
    And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets
    He has done my office. I know not if't be true,
    But I for mere suspicion in that kind
    Will do as if for surety. He holds me well,
    The better shall my purpose work on him.
    Cassio's a proper man. Let me see now-
    To get his place, and to plume up my will
    In double knavery- How, how?- Let's see-
    After some time, to abuse Othello's ear
    That he is too familiar with his wife.  
    He hath a person and a smooth dispose
    To be suspected- framed to make women false.
    The Moor is of a free and open nature,
    That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
    And will as tenderly be led by the nose
    As asses are.
    I have't. It is engender'd. Hell and night
    Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
     Exit.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.
A seaport in Cyprus. An open place near the quay.

Enter Montano and two Gentlemen.

  MONTANO. What from the cape can you discern at sea?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood;
    I cannot, 'twixt the heaven and the main,
    Descry a sail.
  MONTANO. Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land;
    A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements.
    If it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea,
    What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
    Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. A segregation of the Turkish fleet.
    For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
    The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds;
    The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane,
    Seems to cast water on the burning bear,
    And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole.
    I never did like molestation view
    On the enchafed flood.  
  MONTANO.                 If that the Turkish fleet
    Be not enshelter'd and embay'd, they are drown'd;
    It is impossible to bear it out.

                       Enter a third Gentleman.

  THIRD GENTLEMAN. News, lads! Our wars are done.
    The desperate tempest hath so bang'd the Turks,
    That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice
    Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance
    On most part of their fleet.
  MONTANO. How? Is this true?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN.            The ship is here put in,
    A Veronesa. Michael Cassio,
    Lieutenant to the warlike Moor, Othello,
    Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea,
    And is in full commission here for Cyprus.
  MONTANO. I am glad on't; 'tis a worthy governor.
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
    Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly  
    And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted
    With foul and violent tempest.
  MONTANO.                         Pray heavens he be,
    For I have served him, and the man commands
    Like a full soldier. Let's to the seaside, ho!
    As well to see the vessel that's come in
    As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
    Even till we make the main and the aerial blue
    An indistinct regard.
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Come, let's do so,
    For every minute is expectancy
    Of more arrivance.

                            Enter Cassio.

  CASSIO. Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,
    That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
    Give him defense against the elements,
    For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.
  MONTANO. I she well shipp'd?  
  CASSIO. His bark is stoutly timber'd, and his pilot
    Of very expert and approved allowance;
    Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
    Stand in bold cure.
                              A cry within, "A sail, a sail, a sail!"

                      Enter a fourth Gentleman.

                        What noise?
  FOURTH GENTLEMAN. The town is empty; on the brow o' the sea
    Stand ranks of people, and they cry, "A sail!"
  CASSIO. My hopes do shape him for the governor.
                                                          Guns heard.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. They do discharge their shot of courtesy-
    Our friends at least.
  CASSIO.                 I pray you, sir, go forth,
    And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I shall.                                    Exit.
  MONTANO. But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?
  CASSIO. Most fortunately: he hath achieved a maid  
    That paragons description and wild fame,
    One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
    And in the essential vesture of creation
    Does tire the ingener.

                      Re-enter second Gentleman.

                           How now! who has put in?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. 'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.
  CASSIO. He has had most favorable and happy speed:
    Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
    The gutter'd rocks, and congregated sands,
    Traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel,
    As having sense of beauty, do omit
    Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
    The divine Desdemona.
  MONTANO.                What is she?
  CASSIO. She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,
    Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
    Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts  
    A se'nnight's speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
    And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
    That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
    Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms,
    Give renew'd fire to our extincted spirits,
    And bring all Cyprus comfort.

       Enter Desdemona, Emilia Iago, Roderigo, and Attendants.

                                  O, behold,
    The riches of the ship is come on shore!
    Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
    Hall to thee, lady! And the grace of heaven,
    Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
    Enwheel thee round!
  DESDEMONA.            I thank you, valiant Cassio.
    What tidings can you tell me of my lord?
  CASSIO. He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught
    But that he's well and will be shortly here.
  DESDEMONA. O, but I fear- How lost you company?  
  CASSIO. The great contention of the sea and skies
    Parted our fellowship- But, hark! a sail.
                          A cry within, "A sail, a sail!" Guns heard.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. They give their greeting to the citadel;
    This likewise is a friend.
  CASSIO.                      See for the news.
                                                      Exit Gentleman.
    Good ancient, you are welcome. [To Emilia.] Welcome, mistress.
    Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
    That I extend my manners; 'tis my breeding
    That gives me this bold show of courtesy.             Kisses her.
  IAGO. Sir, would she give you so much of her lips
    As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
    You'ld have enough.
  DESDEMONA.            Alas, she has no speech.
  IAGO. In faith, too much;
    I find it still when I have list to sleep.
    Marry, before your ladyship I grant,
    She puts her tongue a little in her heart
    And chides with thinking.  
  EMILIA. You have little cause to say so.
  IAGO. Come on, come on. You are pictures out of doors,
    Bells in your parlors, wildcats in your kitchens,
    Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,
    Players in your housewifery, and housewives in your beds.
  DESDEMONA. O, fie upon thee, slanderer!
  IAGO. Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk:
    You rise to play, and go to bed to work.
  EMILIA. You shall not write my praise.
  IAGO.                                  No, let me not.
  DESDEMONA. What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst
    praise me?
  IAGO. O gentle lady, do not put me to't,
    For I am nothing if not critical.
  DESDEMONA. Come on, assay- There's one gone to the harbor?
  IAGO. Ay, madam.
  DESDEMONA. I am not merry, but I do beguile
    The thing I am by seeming otherwise.
    Come, how wouldst thou praise me?
  IAGO. I am about it, but indeed my invention  
    Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze;
    It plucks out brains and all. But my Muse labors,
    And thus she is deliver'd.
    If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,
    The one's for use, the other useth it.
  DESDEMONA. Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
  IAGO. If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
    She'll find a white that shall her blackness fit.
  DESDEMONA. Worse and worse.
  EMILIA. How if fair and foolish?
  IAGO. She never yet was foolish that was fair,
    For even her folly help'd her to an heir.
  DESDEMONA. These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' the
    alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for her that's foul and
    foolish?
  IAGO. There's none so foul and foolish thereunto,
    But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.
  DESDEMONA. O heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what
    praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that
    in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very  
    malice itself?
  IAGO. She that was ever fair and never proud,
    Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,
    Never lack'd gold and yet went never gay,
    Fled from her wish and yet said, "Now I may";
    She that, being anger'd, her revenge being nigh,
    Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly;
    She that in wisdom never was so frail
    To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail;
    She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind,
    See suitors following and not look behind;
    She was a wight, if ever such wight were-
  DESDEMONA. To do what?
  IAGO. To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
  DESDEMONA. O most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn of him,
    Emilia, though he be thy husband. How say you, Cassio? Is he not
    a most profane and liberal counselor?
  CASSIO. He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the
    soldier than in the scholar.
  IAGO. [Aside.] He takes her by the palm; ay, well said, whisper.  
    With as little a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as
    Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do; I will gyve thee in thine own
    courtship. You say true; 'tis so, indeed. If such tricks as these
    strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you had
    not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are
    most apt to play the sir in. Very good. Well kissed! an excellent
    courtesy! 'tis so, indeed. Yet again your fingers to your lips?
    Would they were clyster-pipes for your sake! [Trumpet within.]
    The Moor! I know his trumpet.
  CASSIO. 'Tis truly so.
  DESDEMONA. Let's meet him and receive him.
  CASSIO. Lo, where he comes!

                    Enter Othello and Attendants.

  OTHELLO. O my fair warrior!
  DESDEMONA.                  My dear Othello!
  OTHELLO. It gives me wonder great as my content
    To see you here before me. O my soul's joy!
    If after every tempest come such calms,  
    May the winds blow till they have waken'd death!
    And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas
    Olympus-high, and duck again as low
    As hell's from heaven! If it were now to die,
    'Twere now to be most happy; for I fear
    My soul hath her content so absolute
    That not another comfort like to this
    Succeeds in unknown fate.
  DESDEMONA.                  The heavens forbid
    But that our loves and comforts should increase,
    Even as our days do grow!
  OTHELLO.                    Amen to that, sweet powers!
    I cannot speak enough of this content;
    It stops me here; it is too much of joy.
    And this, and this, the greatest discords be          Kisses her.
    That e'er our hearts shall make!
  IAGO.                     [Aside.] O, you are well tuned now!
    But I'll set down the pegs that make this music,
    As honest as I am.
  OTHELLO.             Come, let us to the castle.  
    News, friends: our wars are done, the Turks are drown'd.
    How does my old acquaintance of this isle?
    Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus;
    I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,
    I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
    In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago,
    Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
    Bring thou the master to the citadel;
    He is a good one, and his worthiness
    Does challenge much respect. Come, Desdemona,
    Once more well met at Cyprus.
                                    Exeunt all but Iago and Roderigo.
  IAGO. Do thou meet me presently at the harbor. Come hither. If thou
    be'st valiant- as they say base men being in love have then a
    nobility in their natures more than is native to them- list me.
    The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. First, I
    must tell thee this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.
  RODERIGO. With him? Why, 'tis not possible.
  IAGO. Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me
    with what violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging and  
    telling her fantastical lies. And will she love him still for
    prating? Let not thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be
    fed; and what delight shall she have to look on the devil? When
    the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should be,
    again to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite,
    loveliness in favor, sympathy in years, manners, and beauties-
    all which the Moor is defective in. Now, for want of these
    required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find itself
    abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor;
    very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some second
    choice. Now sir, this granted- as it is a most pregnant and
    unforced position- who stands so eminently in the degree of this
    fortune as Cassio does? A knave very voluble; no further
    conscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane
    seeming, for the better compass of his salt and most hidden loose
    affection? Why, none, why, none- a slipper and subtle knave, a
    finder out of occasions, that has an eye can stamp and
    counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present
    itself- a devilish knave! Besides, the knave is handsome, young,
    and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds  
    look after- a pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found
    him already.
  RODERIGO. I cannot believe that in her; she's full of most blest
    condition.
  IAGO. Blest fig's-end! The wine she drinks is made of grapes. If
    she had been blest, she would never have loved the Moor. Blest
    pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand?
    Didst not mark that?
  RODERIGO. Yes, that I did; but that was but courtesy.
  IAGO. Lechery, by this hand; an index and obscure prologue to the
    history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so near with their
    lips that their breaths embraced together. Villainous thoughts,
    Roderigo! When these mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand
    comes the master and main exercise, the incorporate conclusion.
    Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me. I have brought you from
    Venice. Watch you tonight; for the command, I'll lay't upon you.
    Cassio knows you not. I'll not be far from you. Do you find some
    occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or
    tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please,
    which the time shall more favorably minister.  
  RODERIGO. Well.
  IAGO. Sir, he is rash and very sudden in choler, and haply may
    strike at you. Provoke him, that he may; for even out of that
    will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall
    come into no true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio.
    So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means
    I shall then have to prefer them, and the impediment most
    profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation
    of our prosperity.
  RODERIGO. I will do this, if I can bring it to any opportunity.
  IAGO. I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I must
    fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.
  RODERIGO. Adieu.                                              Exit.
  IAGO. That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;
    That she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit.
    The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
    Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,
    And I dare think he'll prove to Desdemona
    A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too,
    Not out of absolute lust, though peradventure  
    I stand accountant for as great a sin,
    But partly led to diet my revenge,
    For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
    Hath leap'd into my seat; the thought whereof
    Doth like a poisonous mineral gnaw my inwards,
    And nothing can or shall content my soul
    Till I am even'd with him, wife for wife.
    Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor
    At least into a jealousy so strong
    That judgement cannot cure. Which thing to do,
    If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace
    For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
    I'll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
    Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb
    (For I fear Cassio with my nightcap too),
    Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
    For making him egregiously an ass
    And practicing upon his peace and quiet
    Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confused:
    Knavery's plain face is never seen till used.               Exit.




SCENE II.
A street.

Enter a Herald with a proclamation; people following.

  HERALD. It is Othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant general,
    that upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere
    perdition of the Turkish fleet, every man put himself into
    triumph; some to dance, some to make bonfires, each man to what
    sport and revels his addiction leads him; for besides these
    beneficial news, it is the celebration of his nuptial. So much
    was his pleasure should be proclaimed. All offices are open, and
    there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of five
    till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of Cyprus
    and our noble general Othello!                            Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A hall in the castle.

Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants.

  OTHELLO. Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.
    Let's teach ourselves that honorable stop,
    Not to outsport discretion.
  CASSIO. Iago hath direction what to do;
    But notwithstanding with my personal eye
    Will I look to't.
  OTHELLO.            Iago is most honest.
    Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest
    Let me have speech with you. Come, my dear love,
    The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
    That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you.
    Good night.
                           Exeunt Othello, Desdemona, and Attendants.

                             Enter Iago.

  CASSIO. Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.  
  IAGO. Not this hour, lieutenant; 'tis not yet ten o' the clock. Our
    general cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemona; who let
    us not therefore blame. He hath not yet made wanton the night
    with her, and she is sport for Jove.
  CASSIO. She's a most exquisite lady.
  IAGO. And, I'll warrant her, full of game.
  CASSIO. Indeed she's a most fresh and delicate creature.
  IAGO. What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley to
    provocation.
  CASSIO. An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest.
  IAGO. And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
  CASSIO. She is indeed perfection.
  IAGO. Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a
    stope of wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants
    that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.
  CASSIO. Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains
    for drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other
    custom of entertainment.
  IAGO. O, they are our friends! But one cup; I'll drink for you.
  CASSIO. I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftily  
    qualified too, and behold what innovation it makes here. I am
    unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with
    any more.
  IAGO. What, man! 'Tis a night of revels, the gallants desire it.
  CASSIO. Where are they?
  IAGO. Here at the door; I pray you, call them in.
  CASSIO. I'll do't, but it dislikes me.                        Exit.
  IAGO. If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
    With that which he hath drunk tonight already,
    He'll be as full of quarrel and offense
    As my young mistress' dog. Now my sick fool Roderigo,
    Whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong side out,
    To Desdemona hath tonight caroused
    Potations pottle-deep; and he's to watch.
    Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits,
    That hold their honors in a wary distance,
    The very elements of this warlike isle,
    Have I tonight fluster'd with flowing cups,
    And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of drunkards,
    Am I to put our Cassio in some action  
    That may offend the isle. But here they come.
    If consequence do but approve my dream,
    My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.

           Re-enter Cassio; with him Montano and Gentlemen;
                    Servants following with wine.

  CASSIO. 'Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.
  MONTANO. Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am a
    soldier.
  IAGO. Some wine, ho!

    [Sings.]   "And let me the canakin clink, clink;
               And let me the canakin clink.
                 A soldier's a man;
                 O, man's life's but a span;
               Why then let a soldier drink."

    Some wine, boys!
  CASSIO. 'Fore God, an excellent song.  
  IAGO. I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in
    potting. Your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied Hollander-
    Drink, ho!- are nothing to your English.
  CASSIO. Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?
  IAGO. Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk; he
    sweats not to overthrow your Almain; he gives your Hollander a
    vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.
  CASSIO. To the health of our general!
  MONTANO. I am for it, lieutenant, and I'll do you justice.
  IAGO. O sweet England!

    [Sings.]   "King Stephen was and-a worthy peer,
                 His breeches cost him but a crown;
               He held them sixpence all too dear,
                 With that he call'd the tailor lown.

               "He was a wight of high renown,
                 And thou art but of low degree.
               'Tis pride that pulls the country down;
                 Then take thine auld cloak about thee."  

    Some wine, ho!
  CASSIO. Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
  IAGO. Will you hear't again?
  CASSIO. No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does
    those things. Well, God's above all, and there be souls must be
    saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
  IAGO. It's true, good lieutenant.
  CASSIO. For mine own part- no offense to the general, nor any man
    of quality- I hope to be saved.
  IAGO. And so do I too, lieutenant.
  CASSIO. Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the lieutenant is to
    be saved before the ancient. Let's have no more of this; let's to
    our affairs. God forgive us our sins! Gentlemen, let's look to
    our business. Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk: this is my
    ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not
    drunk now; I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough.
  ALL. Excellent well.
  CASSIO. Why, very well then; you must not think then that I am
    drunk.                                                      Exit.  
  MONTANO. To the platform, masters; come, let's set the watch.
  IAGO. You see this fellow that is gone before;
    He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar
    And give direction. And do but see his vice;
    'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
    The one as long as the other. 'Tis pity of him.
    I fear the trust Othello puts him in
    On some odd time of his infirmity
    Will shake this island.
  MONTANO.                  But is he often thus?
  IAGO. 'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep.
    He'll watch the horologe a double set,
    If drink rock not his cradle.
  MONTANO.                        It were well
    The general were put in mind of it.
    Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
    Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio
    And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?

                           Enter Roderigo.  

  IAGO. [Aside to him.] How now, Roderigo!
    I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.              Exit Roderigo.
  MONTANO. And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor
    Should hazard such a place as his own second
    With one of an ingraft infirmity.
    It were an honest action to say
    So to the Moor.
  IAGO.             Not I, for this fair island.
    I do love Cassio well, and would do much
    To cure him of this evil- But, hark! What noise?
                                          A cry within, "Help, help!"

                Re-enter Cassio, driving in Roderigo.

  CASSIO. 'Zounds! You rogue! You rascal!
  MONTANO. What's the matter, lieutenant?
  CASSIO. A knave teach me my duty! But I'll beat the knave into a
    twiggen bottle.
  RODERIGO. Beat me!  
  CASSIO. Dost thou prate, rogue?                   Strikes Roderigo.
  MONTANO. Nay, good lieutenant; I pray you, sir, hold your hand.
  CASSIO. Let me go, sir, or I'll knock you o'er the mazzard.
  MONTANO. Come, come, you're drunk.
  CASSIO. Drunk?                                          They fight.
  IAGO. [Aside to Roderigo.] Away, I say; go out and cry a mutiny.
                                                       Exit Roderigo.
    Nay, good lieutenant! God's will, gentlemen!
    Help, ho!- Lieutenant- sir- Montano- sir-
    Help, masters!- Here's a goodly watch indeed!
                                                        A bell rings.
    Who's that that rings the bell?- Diablo, ho!
    The town will rise. God's will, lieutenant, hold!
    You will be shamed forever.

                   Re-enter Othello and Attendants.

  OTHELLO.                      What is the matter here?
  MONTANO. 'Zounds, I bleed still; I am hurt to the death.
   Faints.  
  OTHELLO. Hold, for your lives!
  IAGO. Hold, ho! Lieutenant- sir- Montano- gentlemen-
    Have you forgot all place of sense and duty?
    Hold! the general speaks to you! Hold, hold, for shame!
  OTHELLO. Why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this?
    Are we turn'd Turks, and to ourselves do that
    Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
    For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl.
    He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
    Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
    Silence that dreadful bell; it frights the isle
    From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
    Honest Iago, that look'st dead with grieving,
    Speak: who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.
  IAGO. I do not know. Friends all but now, even now,
    In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
    Devesting them for bed; and then, but now
    (As if some planet had unwitted men),
    Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast,
    In opposition bloody. I cannot speak  
    Any beginning to this peevish odds;
    And would in action glorious I had lost
    Those legs that brought me to a part of it!
  OTHELLO. How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
  CASSIO. I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak.
  OTHELLO. Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil;
    The gravity and stillness of your youth
    The world hath noted, and your name is great
    In mouths of wisest censure. What's the matter,
    That you unlace your reputation thus,
    And spend your rich opinion for the name
    Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
  MONTANO. Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.
    Your officer, Iago, can inform you-
    While I spare speech, which something now offends me-
    Of all that I do know. Nor know I aught
    By me that's said or done amiss this night,
    Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
    And to defend ourselves it be a sin
    When violence assails us.  
  OTHELLO.                    Now, by heaven,
    My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
    And passion, having my best judgement collied,
    Assays to lead the way. If I once stir,
    Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
    Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
    How this foul rout began, who set it on,
    And he that is approved in this offense,
    Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
    Shall lose me. What! in a town of war,
    Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear,
    To manage private and domestic quarrel,
    In night, and on the court and guard of safety!
    'Tis monstrous. Iago, who began't?
  MONTANO. If partially affined, or leagued in office,
    Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
    Thou art no soldier.
  IAGO.                  Touch me not so near:
    I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
    Than it should do offense to Michael Cassio;  
    Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth
    Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general.
    Montano and myself being in speech,
    There comes a fellow crying out for help,
    And Cassio following him with determined sword,
    To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
    Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause.
    Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
    Lest by his clamor- as it so fell out-
    The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot,
    Outran my purpose; and I return'd the rather
    For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
    And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight
    I ne'er might say before. When I came back-
    For this was brief- I found them close together,
    At blow and thrust, even as again they were
    When you yourself did part them.
    More of this matter cannot I report.
    But men are men; the best sometimes forget.
    Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,  
    As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
    Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
    From him that fled some strange indignity,
    Which patience could not pass.
  OTHELLO.                         I know, Iago,
    Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
    Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee,
    But never more be officer of mine.

                    Re-enter Desdemona, attended.

    Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!
    I'll make thee an example.
  DESDEMONA.                   What's the matter?
  OTHELLO. All's well now, sweeting; come away to bed.
    Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon.
    Lead him off.                             Exit Montano, attended.
    Iago, look with care about the town,
    And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.
    Come, Desdemona, 'tis the soldiers' life.  
    To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
                                      Exeunt all but Iago and Cassio.
  IAGO. What, are you hurt, lieutenant?
  CASSIO. Ay, past all surgery.
  IAGO. Marry, heaven forbid!
  CASSIO. Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my
    reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what
    remains is bestial. My reputation, Iago, my reputation!
  IAGO. As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily
    wound; there is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation
    is an idle and most false imposition; oft got without merit and
    lost without deserving. You have lost no reputation at all,
    unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man! there are
    ways to recover the general again. You are but now cast in his
    mood, a punishment more in policy than in malice; even so as one
    would beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious lion. Sue
    to him again, and he's yours.
  CASSIO. I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a
    commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an
    officer. Drunk? and speak parrot? and squabble? swagger? swear?  
    and discourse fustian with one's own shadow? O thou invisible
    spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call
    thee devil!
  IAGO. What was he that you followed with your sword?
    What had he done to you?
  CASSIO. I know not.
  IAGO. Is't possible?
  CASSIO. I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; a
    quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men should put an
    enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains! that we should,
    with joy, pleasance, revel, and applause, transform ourselves
    into beasts!
  IAGO. Why, but you are now well enough. How came you thus
     recovered?
  CASSIO. It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the
    devil wrath: one unperfectness shows me another, to make me
    frankly despise myself.
  IAGO. Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place,
    and the condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish
    this had not befallen; but since it is as it is, mend it for your  
    own good.
  CASSIO. I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me I am a
    drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would
    stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and
    presently a beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is unblest,
    and the ingredient is a devil.
  IAGO. Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be
    well used. Exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I
    think you think I love you.
  CASSIO. I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!
  IAGO. You or any man living may be drunk at some time, man. I'll
    tell you what you shall do. Our general's wife is now the
    general. I may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted
    and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement
    of her parts and graces. Confess yourself freely to her;
    importune her help to put you in your place again. She is of so
    free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a
    vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested. This
    broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter;
    and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack of your  
    love shall grow stronger than it was before.
  CASSIO. You advise me well.
  IAGO. I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.
  CASSIO. I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will beseech
    the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I am desperate of my
    fortunes if they check me here.
  IAGO. You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must to the
    watch.
  CASSIO. Good night, honest Iago.                              Exit.
  IAGO. And what's he then that says I play the villain?
    When this advice is free I give and honest,
    Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
    To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy
    The inclining Desdemona to subdue
    In any honest suit. She's framed as fruitful
    As the free elements. And then for her
    To win the Moor, were't to renounce his baptism,
    All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,
    His soul is so enfetter'd to her love,
    That she may make, unmake, do what she list,  
    Even as her appetite shall play the god
    With his weak function. How am I then a villain
    To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
    Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
    When devils will the blackest sins put on,
    They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
    As I do now. For whiles this honest fool
    Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
    And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
    I'll pour this pestilence into his ear,
    That she repeals him for her body's lust;
    And by how much she strives to do him good,
    She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
    So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
    And out of her own goodness make the net
    That shall enmesh them all.

                           Enter Roderigo.

                                How now, Roderigo!  
  RODERIGO. I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that
    hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is almost spent; I
    have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled; and I think the
    issue will be, I shall have so much experience for my pains; and
    so, with no money at all and a little more wit, return again to
    Venice.
  IAGO. How poor are they that have not patience!
    What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
    Thou know'st we work by wit and not by witchcraft,
    And wit depends on dilatory time.
    Does't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
    And thou by that small hurt hast cashier'd Cassio.
    Though other things grow fair against the sun,
    Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.
    Content thyself awhile. By the mass, 'tis morning;
    Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
    Retire thee; go where thou art billeted.
    Away, I say. Thou shalt know more hereafter.
    Nay, get thee gone. [Exit Roderigo.] Two things are to be done:
    My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress-  
    I'll set her on;
    Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,
    And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
    Soliciting his wife. Ay, that's the way;
    Dull not device by coldness and delay.                      Exit.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
Before the castle.

Enter Cassio and some Musicians.

  CASSIO. Masters, play here, I will content your pains; Something
    that's brief; and bid "Good morrow, general."
    Music.

                             Enter Clown.

  CLOWN. Why, masters, have your instruments been in Naples, that
    they speak i' the nose thus?
  FIRST MUSICIAN. How, sir, how?
  CLOWN. Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?
  FIRST MUSICIAN. Ay, marry, are they, sir.
  CLOWN. O, thereby hangs a tail.
  FIRST MUSICIAN. Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
  CLOWN. Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But,
    masters, here's money for you; and the general so likes your
    music, that he desires you, for love's sake, to make no more
    noise with it.  
  FIRST MUSICIAN. Well, sir, we will not.
  CLOWN. If you have any music that may not be heard, to't again;
    but, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly
    care.
  FIRST MUSICIAN. We have none such, sir.
  CLOWN. Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I'll away.
    Go, vanish into air, away!                      Exeunt Musicians.
  CASSIO. Dost thou hear, my honest friend?
  CLOWN. No, I hear not your honest friend; I hear you.
  CASSIO. Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There's a poor piece of gold
    for thee. If the gentlewoman that attends the general's wife be
    stirring, tell her there's one Cassio entreats her a little favor
    of speech. Wilt thou do this?
  CLOWN. She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall seem
    to notify unto her.
  CASSIO. Do, good my friend.                             Exit Clown.

                             Enter Iago.

                              In happy time, Iago.  
  IAGO. You have not been abed, then?
  CASSIO. Why, no; the day had broke
    Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
    To send in to your wife. My suit to her
    Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona
    Procure me some access.
  IAGO.                     I'll send her to you presently;
    And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor
    Out of the way, that your converse and business
    May be more free.
  CASSIO. I humbly thank you for't. [Exit Iago.] I never knew
    A Florentine more kind and honest.

                            Enter Emilia.

  EMILIA. Good morrow, good lieutenant. I am sorry
    For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.
    The general and his wife are talking of it,
    And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies
    That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus  
    And great affinity and that in wholesome wisdom
    He might not but refuse you; but he protests he loves you
    And needs no other suitor but his likings
    To take the safest occasion by the front
    To bring you in again.
  CASSIO.                  Yet, I beseech you,
    If you think fit, or that it may be done,
    Give me advantage of some brief discourse
    With Desdemona alone.
  EMILIA.                 Pray you, come in.
    I will bestow you where you shall have time
    To speak your bosom freely.
  CASSIO.                       I am much bound to you.
   Exeunt.




SCENE II.
A room in the castle.

Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen.

  OTHELLO. These letters give, Iago, to the pilot,
    And by him do my duties to the Senate.
    That done, I will be walking on the works;
    Repair there to me.
  IAGO.                 Well, my good lord, I'll do't.
  OTHELLO. This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see't?
  GENTLEMEN. We'll wait upon your lordship.                   Exeunt.




SCENE III.
The garden of the castle.

Enter Desdemona, Cassio, and Emilia.

  DESDEMONA. Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
    All my abilities in thy behalf.
  EMILIA. Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband
    As if the cause were his.
  DESDEMONA. O, that's an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,
    But I will have my lord and you again
    As friendly as you were.
  CASSIO.                    Bounteous madam,
    Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
    He's never anything but your true servant.
  DESDEMONA. I know't: I thank you. You do love my lord:
    You have known him long; and be you well assured
    He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
    Than in a politic distance.
  CASSIO.                       Ay, but, lady,
    That policy may either last so long,
    Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,  
    Or breed itself so out of circumstances,
    That I being absent and my place supplied,
    My general will forget my love and service.
  DESDEMONA. Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here
    I give thee warrant of thy place, assure thee,
    If I do vow a friendship, I'll perform it
    To the last article. My lord shall never rest;
    I'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience;
    His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
    I'll intermingle everything he does
    With Cassio's suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,
    For thy solicitor shall rather die
    Than give thy cause away.

                Enter Othello and Iago, at a distance.

  EMILIA. Madam, here comes my lord.
  CASSIO. Madam, I'll take my leave.
  DESDEMONA. Nay, stay and hear me speak.
  CASSIO. Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,  
    Unfit for mine own purposes.
  DESDEMONA. Well, do your discretion.                   Exit Cassio.
  IAGO. Ha! I like not that.
  OTHELLO. What dost thou say?
  IAGO. Nothing, my lord; or if- I know not what.
  OTHELLO. Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
  IAGO. Cassio, my lord! No, sure, I cannot think it,
    That he would steal away so guilty-like,
    Seeing you coming.
  OTHELLO.             I do believe 'twas he.
  DESDEMONA. How now, my lord!
    I have been talking with a suitor here,
    A man that languishes in your displeasure.
  OTHELLO. Who is't you mean?
  DESDEMONA. Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
    If I have any grace or power to move you,
    His present reconciliation take;
    For if he be not one that truly loves you,
    That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
    I have no judgement in an honest face.  
    I prithee, call him back.
  OTHELLO.                    Went he hence now?
  DESDEMONA. Ay, sooth; so humbled
    That he hath left part of his grief with me
    To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
  OTHELLO. Not now, sweet Desdemona; some other time.
  DESDEMONA. But shall't be shortly?
  OTHELLO.                           The sooner, sweet, for you.
  DESDEMONA. Shall't be tonight at supper?
  OTHELLO.                                 No, not tonight.
  DESDEMONA. Tomorrow dinner then?
  OTHELLO.                         I shall not dine at home;
    I meet the captains at the citadel.
  DESDEMONA. Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
    On Tuesday noon, or night, on Wednesday morn.
    I prithee, name the time, but let it not
    Exceed three days. In faith, he's penitent;
    And yet his trespass, in our common reason-
    Save that, they say, the wars must make example
    Out of their best- is not almost a fault  
    To incur a private check. When shall he come?
    Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul,
    What you would ask me, that I should deny,
    Or stand so mammering on. What? Michael Cassio,
    That came awooing with you, and so many a time
    When I have spoke of you dispraisingly
    Hath ta'en your part- to have so much to do
    To bring him in! Trust me, I could do much-
  OTHELLO. Prithee, no more. Let him come when he will;
    I will deny thee nothing.
  DESDEMONA.                  Why, this is not a boon;
    'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
    Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
    Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
    To your own person. Nay, when I have a suit
    Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
    It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,
    And fearful to be granted.
  OTHELLO.                     I will deny thee nothing,
    Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,  
    To leave me but a little to myself.
  DESDEMONA. Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.
  OTHELLO. Farewell, my Desdemona; I'll come to thee straight.
  DESDEMONA. Emilia, come. Be as your fancies teach you;
    Whate'er you be, I am obedient.
                                         Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.
  OTHELLO. Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul,
    But I do love thee! and when I love thee not,
    Chaos is come again.
  IAGO. My noble lord-
  OTHELLO.             What dost thou say, Iago?
  IAGO. Did Michael Cassio, when you woo'd my lady,
    Know of your love?
  OTHELLO. He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?
  IAGO. But for a satisfaction of my thought;
    No further harm.
  OTHELLO.           Why of thy thought, Iago?
  IAGO. I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
  OTHELLO. O, yes, and went between us very oft.
  IAGO. Indeed!  
  OTHELLO. Indeed? ay, indeed. Discern'st thou aught in that?
    Is he not honest?
  IAGO. Honest, my lord?
  OTHELLO. Honest? Ay, honest.
  IAGO. My lord, for aught I know.
  OTHELLO. What dost thou think?
  IAGO. Think, my lord?
  OTHELLO. Think, my lord? By heaven, he echoes me,
    As if there were some monster in his thought
    Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something.
    I heard thee say even now, thou like'st not that,
    When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?
    And when I told thee he was of my counsel
    In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst, "Indeed!"
    And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
    As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
    Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me,
    Show me thy thought.
  IAGO. My lord, you know I love you.
  OTHELLO.                            I think thou dost;  
    And for I know thou'rt full of love and honesty
    And weigh'st thy words before thou givest them breath,
    Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more;
    For such things in a false disloyal knave
    Are tricks of custom; but in a man that's just
    They're close dilations, working from the heart,
    That passion cannot rule.
  IAGO.                       For Michael Cassio,
    I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.
  OTHELLO. I think so too.
  IAGO.                    Men should be what they seem;
    Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
  OTHELLO. Certain, men should be what they seem.
  IAGO. Why then I think Cassio's an honest man.
  OTHELLO. Nay, yet there's more in this.
    I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,
    As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
    The worst of words.
  IAGO.                 Good my lord, pardon me;
    Though I am bound to every act of duty,  
    I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.
    Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false;
    As where's that palace whereinto foul things
    Sometimes intrude not? Who has a breast so pure,
    But some uncleanly apprehensions
    Keep leets and law-days, and in session sit
    With meditations lawful?
  OTHELLO. Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
    If thou but think'st him wrong'd and makest his ear
    A stranger to thy thoughts.
  IAGO.                         I do beseech you-
    Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,
    As, I confess, it is my nature's plague
    To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy
    Shapes faults that are not- that your wisdom yet,
    From one that so imperfectly conceits,
    Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble
    Out of his scattering and unsure observance.
    It were not for your quiet nor your good,
    Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom,  
    To let you know my thoughts.
  OTHELLO.                       What dost thou mean?
  IAGO. Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
    Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
    Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;
    'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
    But he that filches from me my good name
    Robs me of that which not enriches him
    And makes me poor indeed.
  OTHELLO. By heaven, I'll know thy thoughts.
  IAGO. You cannot, if my heart were in your hand;
    Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.
  OTHELLO. Ha!
  IAGO.        O, beware, my lord, of jealousy!
    It is the green-eyed monster, which doth mock
    The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss
    Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
    But O, what damned minutes tells he o'er
    Who dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves!
  OTHELLO. O misery!  
  IAGO. Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
    But riches fineless is as poor as winter
    To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
    Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend
    From jealousy!
  OTHELLO.         Why, why is this?
    Think'st thou I'ld make a life of jealousy,
    To follow still the changes of the moon
    With fresh suspicions? No! To be once in doubt
    Is once to be resolved. Exchange me for a goat
    When I shall turn the business of my soul
    To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
    Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealous
    To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
    Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well;
    Where virtue is, these are more virtuous.
    Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
    The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt;
    For she had eyes and chose me. No, Iago,
    I'll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;  
    And on the proof, there is no more but this-
    Away at once with love or jealousy!
  IAGO. I am glad of it, for now I shall have reason
    To show the love and duty that I bear you
    With franker spirit. Therefore, as I am bound,
    Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
    Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
    Wear your eye thus, not jealous nor secure.
    I would not have your free and noble nature
    Out of self-bounty be abused. Look to't.
    I know our country disposition well;
    In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks
    They dare not show their husbands; their best conscience
    Is not to leave't undone, but keep't unknown.
  OTHELLO. Dost thou say so?
  IAGO. She did deceive her father, marrying you;
    And when she seem'd to shake and fear your looks,
    She loved them most.
  OTHELLO.               And so she did.
  IAGO.                                  Why, go to then.  
    She that so young could give out such a seeming,
    To seel her father's eyes up close as oak-
    He thought 'twas witchcraft- but I am much to blame;
    I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
    For too much loving you.
  OTHELLO.                   I am bound to thee forever.
  IAGO. I see this hath a little dash'd your spirits.
  OTHELLO. Not a jot, not a jot.
  IAGO.                          I'faith, I fear it has.
    I hope you will consider what is spoke
    Comes from my love. But I do see you're moved;
    I am to pray you not to strain my speech
    To grosser issues nor to larger reach
    Than to suspicion.
  OTHELLO. I will not.
  IAGO.                Should you do so, my lord,
    My speech should fall into such vile success
    Which my thoughts aim not at. Cassio's my worthy friend-
    My lord, I see you're moved.
  OTHELLO.                       No, not much moved.  
    I do not think but Desdemona's honest.
  IAGO. Long live she so! and long live you to think so!
  OTHELLO. And yet, how nature erring from itself-
  IAGO. Ay, there's the point, as- to be bold with you-
    Not to affect many proposed matches
    Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
    Whereto we see in all things nature tends-
    Foh, one may smell in such a will most rank,
    Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural.
    But pardon me. I do not in position
    Distinctly speak of her; though I may fear,
    Her will, recoiling to her better judgement,
    May fall to match you with her country forms,
    And happily repent.
  OTHELLO.              Farewell, farewell.
    If more thou dost perceive, let me know more;
    Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.
  IAGO. [Going.] My lord, I take my leave.
  OTHELLO. Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
    Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.  
  IAGO. [Returning.] My lord, I would I might entreat your honor
    To scan this thing no further; leave it to time.
    Though it be fit that Cassio have his place,
    For sure he fills it up with great ability,
    Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,
    You shall by that perceive him and his means.
    Note if your lady strain his entertainment
    With any strong or vehement importunity;
    Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
    Let me be thought too busy in my fears-
    As worthy cause I have to fear I am-
    And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.
  OTHELLO. Fear not my government.
  IAGO. I once more take my leave.                              Exit.
  OTHELLO. This fellow's of exceeding honesty,
    And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit,
    Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
    Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,
    I'ld whistle her off and let her down the wind
    To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black  
    And have not those soft parts of conversation
    That chamberers have, or for I am declined
    Into the vale of years- yet that's not much-
    She's gone. I am abused, and my relief
    Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
    That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
    And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
    And live upon the vapor of a dungeon,
    Than keep a corner in the thing I love
    For others' uses. Yet, 'tis the plague of great ones:
    Prerogatived are they less than the base;
    'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death.
    Even then this forked plague is fated to us
    When we do quicken. Desdemona comes:

                    Re-enter Desdemona and Emilia.

    If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself!
    I'll not believe't.
  DESDEMONA.            How now, my dear Othello!  
    Your dinner, and the generous islanders
    By you invited, do attend your presence.
  OTHELLO. I am to blame.
  DESDEMONA.              Why do you speak so faintly?
    Are you not well?
  OTHELLO. I have a pain upon my forehead here.
  DESDEMONA. Faith, that's with watching; 'twill away again.
    Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
    It will be well.
  OTHELLO.           Your napkin is too little;
            He puts the handkerchief from him, and she drops it.
    Let it alone. Come, I'll go in with you.
  DESDEMONA. I am very sorry that you are not well.
                                        Exeunt Othello and Desdemona.
  EMILIA. I am glad I have found this napkin;
    This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
    My wayward husband hath a hundred times
    Woo'd me to steal it; but she so loves the token,
    For he conjured her she should ever keep it,
    That she reserves it evermore about her  
    To kiss and talk to. I'll have the work ta'en out,
    And give't Iago. What he will do with it
    Heaven knows, not I;
    I nothing but to please his fantasy.

                            Re-enter Iago.

  IAGO. How now, what do you here alone?
  EMILIA. Do not you chide; I have a thing for you.
  IAGO. A thing for me? It is a common thing-
  EMILIA. Ha!
  IAGO. To have a foolish wife.
  EMILIA. O, is that all? What will you give me now
    For that same handkerchief?
  IAGO.                         What handkerchief?
  EMILIA. What handkerchief?
    Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,
    That which so often you did bid me steal.
  IAGO. Hast stol'n it from her?
  EMILIA. No, faith; she let it drop by negligence,  
    And, to the advantage, I being here took't up.
    Look, here it is.
  IAGO.               A good wench; give it me.
  EMILIA. What will you do with't, that you have been so earnest
    To have me filch it?
  IAGO. [Snatching it.] Why, what is that to you?
  EMILIA. If't be not for some purpose of import,
    Give't me again. Poor lady, she'll run mad
    When she shall lack it.
  IAGO. Be not acknown on't; I have use for it.
    Go, leave me.                                        Exit Emilia.
    I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin,
    And let him find it. Trifles light as air
    Are to the jealous confirmations strong
    As proofs of holy writ; this may do something.
    The Moor already changes with my poison:
    Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
    Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
    But with a little act upon the blood
    Burn like the mines of sulphur. I did say so.  
    Look, where he comes!

                          Re-enter Othello.

                          Not poppy, nor mandragora,
    Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
    Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
    Which thou owedst yesterday.
  OTHELLO.                       Ha, ha, false to me?
  IAGO. Why, how now, general! No more of that.
  OTHELLO. Avaunt! be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack.
    I swear 'tis better to be much abused
    Than but to know't a little.
  IAGO.                          How now, my lord?
  OTHELLO. What sense had I of her stol'n hours of lust?
    I saw't not, thought it not, it harm'd not me;
    I slept the next night well, was free and merry;
    I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips.
    He that is robb'd, not wanting what is stol'n,
    Let him not know't and he's not robb'd at all.  
  IAGO. I am sorry to hear this.
  OTHELLO. I had been happy if the general camp,
    Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
    So I had nothing known. O, now forever
    Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!
    Farewell the plumed troop and the big wars
    That make ambition virtue! O, farewell,
    Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
    The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,
    The royal banner, and all quality,
    Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
    And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
    The immortal Jove's dread clamors counterfeit,
    Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone!
  IAGO. Is't possible, my lord?
  OTHELLO. Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore;
    Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof;
    Or, by the worth of man's eternal soul,
    Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
    Than answer my waked wrath!  
  IAGO.                         Is't come to this?
  OTHELLO. Make me to see't; or at the least so prove it,
    That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
    To hang a doubt on; or woe upon thy life!
  IAGO. My noble lord-
  OTHELLO. If thou dost slander her and torture me,
    Never pray more; abandon all remorse;
    On horror's head horrors accumulate;
    Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed;
    For nothing canst thou to damnation add
    Greater than that.
  IAGO.                O grace! O heaven defend me!
    Are you a man? have you a soul or sense?
    God be wi' you; take mine office. O wretched fool,
    That livest to make thine honesty a vice!
    O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,
    To be direct and honest is not safe.
    I thank you for this profit, and from hence
    I'll love no friend sith love breeds such offense.
  OTHELLO. Nay, stay; thou shouldst be honest.  
  IAGO. I should be wise; for honesty's a fool,
    And loses that it works for.
  OTHELLO.                       By the world,
    I think my wife be honest, and think she is not;
    I think that thou art just, and think thou art not.
    I'll have some proof. Her name, that was as fresh
    As Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black
    As mine own face. If there be cords or knives,
    Poison or fire, or suffocating streams,
    I'll not endure it. Would I were satisfied!
  IAGO. I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion;
    I do repent me that I put it to you.
    You would be satisfied?
  OTHELLO.                  Would? Nay, I will.
  IAGO. And may. But, how? how satisfied, my lord?
    Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on?
    Behold her topp'd?
  OTHELLO.             Death and damnation! O!
  IAGO. It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
    To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then,  
    If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
    More than their own! What then? how then?
    What shall I say? Where's satisfaction?
    It is impossible you should see this
    Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
    As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
    As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say,
    If imputation and strong circumstances,
    Which lead directly to the door of truth,
    Will give you satisfaction, you may have't.
  OTHELLO. Give me a living reason she's disloyal.
  IAGO. I do not like the office;
    But sith I am enter'd in this cause so far,
    Prick'd to't by foolish honesty and love,
    I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately
    And, being troubled with a raging tooth,
    I could not sleep.
    There are a kind of men so loose of soul,
    That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs;
    One of this kind is Cassio.  
    In sleep I heard him say, "Sweet Desdemona,
    Let us be wary, let us hide our loves";
    And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
    Cry, "O sweet creature!" and then kiss me hard,
    As if he pluck'd up kisses by the roots,
    That grew upon my lips; then laid his leg
    Over my thigh, and sigh'd and kiss'd; and then
    Cried, "Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!"
  OTHELLO. O monstrous! monstrous!
  IAGO.                            Nay, this was but his dream.
  OTHELLO. But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
    'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.
  IAGO. And this may help to thicken other proofs
    That do demonstrate thinly.
  OTHELLO.                      I'll tear her all to pieces.
  IAGO. Nay, but be wise; yet we see nothing done;
    She may be honest yet. Tell me but this;
    Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
    Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand?
  OTHELLO. I gave her such a one; 'twas my first gift.  
  IAGO. I know not that; but such a handkerchief-
    I am sure it was your wife's- did I today
    See Cassio wipe his beard with.
  OTHELLO.                          If it be that-
  IAGO. If it be that, or any that was hers,
    It speaks against her with the other proofs.
  OTHELLO. O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
    One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
    Now do I see 'tis true. Look here, Iago,
    All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
    'Tis gone.
    Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow hell!
    Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
    To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
    For 'tis of aspics' tongues!
  IAGO.                          Yet be content.
  OTHELLO. O, blood, blood, blood!
  IAGO. Patience, I say; your mind perhaps may change.
  OTHELLO. Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
    Whose icy current and compulsive course  
    Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
    To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
    Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,
    Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love,
    Till that a capable and wide revenge
    Swallow them up. Now, by yond marble heaven,
    In the due reverence of a sacred vow                      Kneels.
    I here engage my words.
  IAGO.                     Do not rise yet.                  Kneels.
    Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
    You elements that clip us round about,
    Witness that here Iago doth give up
    The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
    To wrong'd Othello's service! Let him command,
    And to obey shall be in me remorse,
    What bloody business ever.                             They rise.
  OTHELLO.                     I greet thy love,
    Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
    And will upon the instant put thee to't:
    Within these three days let me hear thee say  
    That Cassio's not alive.
  IAGO. My friend is dead, 'tis done at your request;
    But let her live.
  OTHELLO.            Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her!
    Come, go with me apart; I will withdraw,
    To furnish me with some swift means of death
    For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
  IAGO. I am your own forever.                                Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
Before the castle.

Enter Desdemona, Emilia, and Clown.

  DESDEMONA. Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?
  CLOWN. I dare not say he lies anywhere.
  DESDEMONA. Why, man?
  CLOWN. He's a soldier; and for one to say a soldier lies, is
    stabbing.
  DESDEMONA. Go to! Where lodges he?
  CLOWN. To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where I lie.
  DESDEMONA. Can anything be made of this?
  CLOWN. I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging,
    and say he lies here or he lies there, were to lie in mine own
    throat.
  DESDEMONA. Can you inquire him out and be edified by report?
  CLOWN. I will catechize the world for him; that is, make questions
    and by them answer.
  DESDEMONA. Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved my
    lord on his behalf and hope all will be well.
  CLOWN. To do this is within the compass of man's wit, and therefore  
    I will attempt the doing it.                                Exit.
  DESDEMONA. Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?
  EMILIA. I know not, madam.
  DESDEMONA. Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
    Full of crusadoes; and, but my noble Moor
    Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
    As jealous creatures are, it were enough
    To put him to ill thinking.
  EMILIA.                       Is he not jealous?
  DESDEMONA. Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
    Drew all such humors from him.
  EMILIA.                          Look, where he comes.
  DESDEMONA. I will not leave him now till Cassio
    Be call'd to him.

                            Enter Othello.

                      How is't with you, my lord?
  OTHELLO. Well, my good lady. [Aside.] O, hardness to dissemble!
    How do you, Desdemona?  
  DESDEMONA.               Well, my good lord.
  OTHELLO. Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.
  DESDEMONA. It yet has felt no age nor known no sorrow.
  OTHELLO. This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart;
    Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
    A sequester from liberty, fasting, and prayer,
    Much castigation, exercise devout,
    For here's a young and sweating devil here
    That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand,
    A frank one.
  DESDEMONA. You may, indeed, say so;
    For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.
  OTHELLO. A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands;
    But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
  DESDEMONA. I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.
  OTHELLO. What promise, chuck?
  DESDEMONA. I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
  OTHELLO. I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me;
    Lend me thy handkerchief.
  DESDEMONA. Here, my lord.  
  OTHELLO. That which I gave you.
  DESDEMONA. I have it not about me.
  OTHELLO. Not?
  DESDEMONA. No, faith, my lord.
  OTHELLO. That's a fault. That handkerchief
    Did an Egyptian to my mother give;
    She was a charmer, and could almost read
    The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it,
    'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
    Entirely to her love, but if she lost it
    Or made a gift of it, my father's eye
    Should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt
    After new fancies. She dying gave it me,
    And bid me, when my fate would have me wive,
    To give it her. I did so, and take heed on't;
    Make it a darling like your precious eye;
    To lose't or give't away were such perdition
    As nothing else could match.
  DESDEMONA.                     Is't possible?
  OTHELLO. 'Tis true; there's magic in the web of it.  
    A sibyl, that had number'd in the world
    The sun to course two hundred compasses,
    In her prophetic fury sew'd the work;
    The worms were hallow'd that did breed the silk,
    And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful
    Conserved of maiden's hearts.
  DESDEMONA.                      Indeed! is't true?
  OTHELLO. Most veritable; therefore look to't well.
  DESDEMONA. Then would to God that I had never seen't!
  OTHELLO. Ha! wherefore?
  DESDEMONA. Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
  OTHELLO. Is't lost? is't gone? speak, is it out o' the way?
  DESDEMONA. Heaven bless us!
  OTHELLO. Say you?
  DESDEMONA. It is not lost; but what an if it were?
  OTHELLO. How?
  DESDEMONA. I say, it is not lost.
  OTHELLO. Fetch't, let me see it.
  DESDEMONA. Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.
    This is a trick to put me from my suit.  
    Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
  OTHELLO. Fetch me the handkerchief, my mind misgives.
  DESDEMONA. Come, come,
    You'll never meet a more sufficient man.
  OTHELLO. The handkerchief!
  DESDEMONA.                 I pray, talk me of Cassio.
  OTHELLO. The handkerchief!
  DESDEMONA.                 A man that all his time
    Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,
    Shared dangers with you-
  OTHELLO. The handkerchief!
  DESDEMONA. In sooth, you are to blame.
  OTHELLO. Away!                                                Exit.
  EMILIA. Is not this man jealous?
  DESDEMONA. I ne'er saw this before.
    Sure there's some wonder in this handkerchief;
    I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
  EMILIA. 'Tis not a year or two shows us a man.
    They are all but stomachs and we all but food;
    They eat us hungerly, and when they are full  
    They belch us. Look you! Cassio and my husband.

                        Enter Cassio and Iago.

  IAGO. There is no other way; 'tis she must do't.
    And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.
  DESDEMONA. How now, good Cassio! What's the news with you?
  CASSIO. Madam, my former suit: I do beseech you
    That by your virtuous means I may again
    Exist and be a member of his love
    Whom I with all the office of my heart
    Entirely honor. I would not be delay'd.
    If my offense be of such mortal kind
    That nor my service past nor present sorrows
    Nor purposed merit in futurity
    Can ransom me into his love again,
    But to know so must be my benefit;
    So shall I clothe me in a forced content
    And shut myself up in some other course
    To Fortune's alms.  
  DESDEMONA.           Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio!
    My advocation is not now in tune;
    My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him
    Were he in favor as in humor alter'd.
    So help me every spirit sanctified,
    As I have spoken for you all my best
    And stood within the blank of his displeasure
    For my free speech! You must awhile be patient.
    What I can do I will; and more I will
    Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.
  IAGO. Is my lord angry?
  EMILIA.                 He went hence but now,
    And certainly in strange unquietness.
  IAGO. Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,
    When it hath blown his ranks into the air
    And, like the devil, from his very arm
    Puff'd his own brother. And can he be angry?
    Something of moment then. I will go meet him.
    There's matter in't indeed if he be angry.
  DESDEMONA. I prithee, do so.                             Exit Iago.  
                               Something sure of state,
    Either from Venice or some unhatch'd practice
    Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,
    Hath puddled his clear spirit; and in such cases
    Men's natures wrangle with inferior things,
    Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so;
    For let our finger ache, and it indues
    Our other healthful members even to that sense
    Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods,
    Nor of them look for such observancy
    As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
    I was, unhandsome warrior as I am,
    Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
    But now I find I had suborn'd the witness,
    And he's indicted falsely.
  EMILIA. Pray heaven it be state matters, as you think,
    And no conception nor no jealous toy
    Concerning you.
  DESDEMONA. Alas the day, I never gave him cause!
  EMILIA. But jealous souls will not be answer'd so;  
    They are not ever jealous for the cause,
    But jealous for they are jealous. 'Tis a monster
    Begot upon itself, born on itself.
  DESDEMONA. Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind!
  EMILIA. Lady, amen.
  DESDEMONA. I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout.
    If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit,
    And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
  CASSIO. I humbly thank your ladyship.
                                         Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.

                            Enter Bianca.

  BIANCA. Save you, friend Cassio!
  CASSIO.                          What make you from home?
    How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?
    I'faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
  BIANCA. And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
    What, keep a week away? seven days and nights?
    Eight score eight hours? and lovers' absent hours,  
    More tedious than the dial eight score times?
    O weary reckoning!
  CASSIO.              Pardon me, Bianca.
    I have this while with leaden thoughts been press'd;
    But I shall in a more continuate time
    Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,
                                  Gives her Desdemona's handkerchief.
    Take me this work out.
  BIANCA.                  O Cassio, whence came this?
    This is some token from a newer friend.
    To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
    Is't come to this? Well, well.
  CASSIO.                          Go to, woman!
    Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,
    From whence you have them. You are jealous now
    That this is from some mistress, some remembrance.
    No, by my faith, Bianca.
  BIANCA.                    Why, whose is it?
  CASSIO. I know not, sweet. I found it in my chamber.
    I like the work well. Ere it be demanded-  
    As like enough it will- I'ld have it copied.
    Take it, and do't; and leave me for this time.
  BIANCA. Leave you! wherefore?
  CASSIO. I do attend here on the general;
    And think it no addition, nor my wish,
    To have him see me woman'd.
  BIANCA.                       Why, I pray you?
  CASSIO. Not that I love you not.
  BIANCA.                          But that you do not love me.
    I pray you, bring me on the way a little,
    And say if I shall see you soon at night.
  CASSIO. 'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
    For I attend here, but I'll see you soon.
  BIANCA. 'Tis very good; I must be circumstanced.            Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
Cyprus. Before the castle.

Enter Othello and Iago.

  IAGO. Will you think so?
  OTHELLO.                 Think so, Iago?
  IAGO.                                    What,
    To kiss in private?
  OTHELLO.              An unauthorized kiss.
  IAGO. Or to be naked with her friend in bed
    An hour or more, not meaning any harm?
  OTHELLO. Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm!
    It is hypocrisy against the devil.
    They that mean virtuously and yet do so,
    The devil their virtue tempts and they tempt heaven.
  IAGO. So they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip.
    But if I give my wife a handkerchief-
  OTHELLO. What then?
  IAGO. Why, then, 'tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
    She may, I think, bestow't on any man.
  OTHELLO. She is protectress of her honor too.  
    May she give that?
  IAGO. Her honor is an essence that's not seen;
    They have it very oft that have it not.
    But for the handkerchief-
  OTHELLO. By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
    Thou said'st- O, it comes o'er my memory,
    As doth the raven o'er the infected house,
    Boding to all- he had my handkerchief.
  IAGO. Ay, what of that?
  OTHELLO.                That's not so good now.
  IAGO.                                           What,
    If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
    Or heard him say- as knaves be such abroad,
    Who having, by their own importunate suit,
    Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
    Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
    But they must blab-
  OTHELLO.              Hath he said anything?
  IAGO. He hath, my lord; but be you well assured,
    No more than he'll unswear.  
  OTHELLO.                      What hath he said?
  IAGO. Faith, that he did- I know not what he did.
  OTHELLO. What? what?
  IAGO. Lie-
  OTHELLO. With her?
  IAGO.              With her, on her, what you will.
  OTHELLO. Lie with her! lie on her! We say lie on her, when they
    belie her. Lie with her! 'Zounds, that's fulsome! Handkerchief-
    confessions- handkerchief! To confess and be hanged for his labor-
    first, to be hanged, and then to confess. I tremble at it.
    Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without
    some instruction. It is not words that shakes me thus. Pish!
    Noses, ears, and lips. Is't possible? Confess? Handkerchief? O
    devil!
                                                   Falls in a trance.
  IAGO. Work on,
    My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught,
    And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
    All guiltless, meet reproach. What, ho! My lord!
    My lord, I say! Othello!  

                            Enter Cassio.

                             How now, Cassio!
  CASSIO. What's the matter?
  IAGO. My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy.
    This is his second fit; he had one yesterday.
  CASSIO. Rub him about the temples.
  IAGO.                              No, forbear;
    The lethargy must have his quiet course.
    If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
    Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs.
    Do you withdraw yourself a little while,
    He will recover straight. When he is gone,
    I would on great occasion speak with you.            Exit Cassio.
    How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?
  OTHELLO. Dost thou mock me?
  IAGO.                       I mock you? No, by heaven.
    Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
  OTHELLO. A horned man's a monster and a beast.  
  IAGO. There's many a beast then in a populous city,
    And many a civil monster.
  OTHELLO. Did he confess it?
  IAGO.                       Good sir, be a man;
    Think every bearded fellow that's but yoked
    May draw with you. There's millions now alive
    That nightly lie in those unproper beds
    Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.
    O, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock,
    To lip a wanton in a secure couch,
    And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know,
    And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
  OTHELLO. O, thou art wise; 'tis certain.
  IAGO.                                    Stand you awhile apart,
    Confine yourself but in a patient list.
    Whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief-
    A passion most unsuiting such a man-
    Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
    And laid good 'scuse upon your ecstasy;
    Bade him anon return and here speak with me  
    The which he promised. Do but encave yourself
    And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
    That dwell in every region of his face;
    For I will make him tell the tale anew,
    Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
    He hath and is again to cope your wife.
    I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,
    Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,
    And nothing of a man.
  OTHELLO.                Dost thou hear, Iago?
    I will be found most cunning in my patience;
    But (dost thou hear?) most bloody.
  IAGO.                                That's not amiss;
    But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
                                                     Othello retires.
    Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
    A housewife that by selling her desires
    Buys herself bread and clothes. It is a creature
    That dotes on Cassio, as 'tis the strumpet's plague
    To beguile many and be beguiled by one.  
    He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain
    From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.

                           Re-enter Cassio.

    As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad;
    And his unbookish jealousy must construe
    Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behavior
    Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant?
  CASSIO. The worser that you give me the addition
    Whose want even kills me.
  IAGO. Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on't.
    Now, if this suit lay in Bianco's power,
    How quickly should you speed!
  CASSIO.                         Alas, poor caitiff!
  OTHELLO. Look, how he laughs already!
  IAGO. I never knew a woman love man so.
  CASSIO. Alas, poor rogue! I think, i'faith, she loves me.
  OTHELLO. Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.
  IAGO. Do you hear, Cassio?  
  OTHELLO.                   Now he importunes him
    To tell it o'er. Go to; well said, well said.
  IAGO. She gives it out that you shall marry her.
    Do you intend it?
  CASSIO. Ha, ha, ha!
  OTHELLO. Do you triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?
  CASSIO. I marry her! What? A customer! I prithee, bear some charity
    to my wit; do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha!
  OTHELLO. So, so, so, so. They laugh that win.
  IAGO. Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.
  CASSIO. Prithee, say true.
  IAGO. I am a very villain else.
  OTHELLO. Have you scored me? Well.
  CASSIO. This is the monkey's own giving out. She is persuaded I
    will marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my
    promise.
  OTHELLO. Iago beckons me; now he begins the story.
  CASSIO. She was here even now; she haunts me in every place. I was
    the other day talking on the sea bank with certain Venetians, and
    thither comes the bauble, and, by this hand, she falls me thus  
    about my neck-
  OTHELLO. Crying, "O dear Cassio!" as it were; his gesture imports
    it.
  CASSIO. So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me; so hales and pulls
    me. Ha, ha, ha!
  OTHELLO. Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. O, I see
    that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.
  CASSIO. Well, I must leave her company.
  IAGO. Before me! look where she comes.
  CASSIO. 'Tis such another fitchew! marry, a perfumed one.

                            Enter Bianca.

    What do you mean by this haunting of me?
  BIANCA. Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by
    that same handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to
    take it. I must take out the work? A likely piece of work that
    you should find it in your chamber and not know who left it
    there! This is some minx's token, and I must take out the work?
    There, give it your hobbyhorse. Wheresoever you had it, I'll take  
    out no work on't.
  CASSIO. How now, my sweet Bianca! how now! how now!
  OTHELLO. By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!
  BIANCA. An you'll come to supper tonight, you may; an you will not,
    come when you are next prepared for.                        Exit.
  IAGO. After her, after her.
  CASSIO. Faith, I must; she'll rail i' the street else.
  IAGO. Will you sup there?
  CASSIO. Faith, I intend so.
  IAGO. Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain speak
    with you.
  CASSIO. Prithee, come; will you?
  IAGO. Go to; say no more.                              Exit Cassio.
  OTHELLO. [Advancing.] How shall I murther him, Iago?
  IAGO. Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
  OTHELLO. O Iago!
  IAGO. And did you see the handkerchief?
  OTHELLO. Was that mine?
  IAGO. Yours, by this hand. And to see how he prizes the foolish
    woman your wife! She gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.  
  OTHELLO. I would have him nine years akilling. A fine woman! a fair
    woman! a sweet woman!
  IAGO. Nay, you must forget that.
  OTHELLO. Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned tonight, for
    she shall not live. No, my heart is turned to stone; I strike it,
    and it hurts my hand. O, the world hath not a sweeter creature.
    She might lie by an emperor's side, and command him tasks.
  IAGO. Nay, that's not your way.
  OTHELLO. Hang her! I do but say what she is. So delicate with her
    needle, an admirable musician. O, she will sing the savageness
    out of a bear. Of so high and plenteous wit and invention-
  IAGO. She's the worse for all this.
  OTHELLO. O, a thousand, a thousand times. And then, of so gentle a
    condition!
  IAGO. Ay, too gentle.
  OTHELLO. Nay, that's certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago!
    O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
  IAGO. If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to
    offend, for, if it touch not you, it comes near nobody.
  OTHELLO. I will chop her into messes. Cuckold me!  
  IAGO. O, 'tis foul in her.
  OTHELLO. With mine officer!
  IAGO. That's fouler.
  OTHELLO. Get me some poison, Iago, this night. I'll not expostulate
    with her, lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again. This
    night, Iago.
  IAGO. Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, even the bed
    she hath contaminated.
  OTHELLO. Good, good, the justice of it pleases, very good.
  IAGO. And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You shall hear more
    by midnight.
  OTHELLO. Excellent good. [A trumpet within.] What trumpet is that
    same?
  IAGO. Something from Venice, sure. 'Tis Lodovico
    Come from the Duke. And, see your wife is with him.

              Enter Lodovico, Desdemona, and Attendants.

  LODOVICO. God save the worthy general!
  OTHELLO.                               With all my heart, sir.  
  LODOVICO. The Duke and Senators of Venice greet you.
                                                  Gives him a letter.
  OTHELLO. I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
                                         Opens the letter, and reads.
  DESDEMONA. And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?
  IAGO. I am very glad to see you, signior;
    Welcome to Cyprus.
  LODOVICO. I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?
  IAGO. Lives, sir.
  DESDEMONA. Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord
    An unkind breech; but you shall make all well.
  OTHELLO. Are you sure of that?
  DESDEMONA. My lord?
  OTHELLO. [Reads.] "This fail you not to do, as you will-"
  LODOVICO. He did not call; he's busy in the paper.
    Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio?
  DESDEMONA. A most unhappy one. I would do much
    To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
  OTHELLO. Fire and brimstone!
  DESDEMONA. My lord?  
  OTHELLO. Are you wise?
  DESDEMONA. What, is he angry?
  LODOVICO.                     May be the letter moved him;
    For, as I think, they do command him home,
    Deputing Cassio in his government.
  DESDEMONA. By my troth, I am glad on't.
  OTHELLO.                                Indeed!
  DESDEMONA.                                      My lord?
  OTHELLO. I am glad to see you mad.
  DESDEMONA.                         Why, sweet Othello?
  OTHELLO. Devil!                                        Strikes her.
  DESDEMONA. I have not deserved this.
  LODOVICO. My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
    Though I should swear I saw't. 'Tis very much.
    Make her amends; she weeps.
  OTHELLO.                      O devil, devil!
    If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,
    Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
    Out of my sight!
  DESDEMONA. [Going.] I will not stay to offend you.  
  LODOVICO. Truly, an obedient lady.
    I do beseech your lordship, call her back.
  OTHELLO. Mistress!
  DESDEMONA. My lord?
  OTHELLO. What would you with her, sir?
  LODOVICO.                              Who, I, my lord?
  OTHELLO. Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn.
    Sir, she can turn and turn, and yet go on,
    And turn again; and she can weep, sir, weep;
    And she's obedient, as you say, obedient,
    Very obedient. Proceed you in your tears.
    Concerning this, sir- O well-painted passion!-
    I am commanded home. Get you away;
    I'll send for you anon. Sir, I obey the mandate,
    And will return to Venice. Hence, avaunt!
                                                      Exit Desdemona.
    Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight,
    I do entreat that we may sup together.
    You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys!
     Exit.  
  LODOVICO. Is this the noble Moor whom our full Senate
    Call all in all sufficient? This the nature
    Whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue
    The shot of accident nor dart of chance
    Could neither graze nor pierce?
  IAGO.                             He is much changed.
  LODOVICO. Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
  IAGO. He's that he is. I may not breathe my censure
    What he might be: if what he might he is not,
    I would to heaven he were!
  LODOVICO.                    What, strike his wife!
  IAGO. Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew
    That stroke would prove the worst!
  LODOVICO.                            Is it his use?
    Or did the letters work upon his blood,
    And new create this fault?
  IAGO.                        Alas, alas!
    It is not honesty in me to speak
    What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,
    And his own courses will denote him so  
    That I may save my speech. Do but go after,
    And mark how he continues.
  LODOVICO. I am sorry that I am deceived in him.             Exeunt.




SCENE II.
A room in the castle.

Enter Othello and Emilia.

  OTHELLO. You have seen nothing, then?
  EMILIA. Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
  OTHELLO. Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
  EMILIA. But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
    Each syllable that breath made up between them.
  OTHELLO. What, did they never whisper?
  EMILIA.                                Never, my lord.
  OTHELLO. Nor send you out o' the way?
  EMILIA. Never.
  OTHELLO. To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
  EMILIA. Never, my lord.
  OTHELLO. That's strange.
  EMILIA. I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
    Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other,
    Remove your thought; it doth abuse your bosom.
    If any wretch have put this in your head,
    Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse!  
    For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
    There's no man happy; the purest of their wives
    Is foul as slander.
  OTHELLO.              Bid her come hither; go.         Exit Emilia.
    She says enough; yet she's a simple bawd
    That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,
    A closet lock and key of villainous secrets.
    And yet she'll kneel and pray; I have seen her do't.

                     Enter Desdemona with Emilia.

  DESDEMONA. My lord, what is your will?
  OTHELLO.                               Pray, chuck, come hither.
  DESDEMONA. What is your pleasure?
  OTHELLO.                          Let me see your eyes;
    Look in my face.
  DESDEMONA.         What horrible fancy's this?
  OTHELLO. [To Emilia.] Some of your function, mistress,
    Leave procreants alone and shut the door;
    Cough, or cry "hem," if anybody come.  
    Your mystery, your mystery; nay, dispatch.           Exit Emilia.
  DESDEMONA. Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
    I understand a fury in your words,
    But not the words.
  OTHELLO. Why, what art thou?
  DESDEMONA. Your wife, my lord, your true and loyal wife.
  OTHELLO. Come, swear it, damn thyself;
    Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
    Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double-damn'd;
    Swear thou art honest.
  DESDEMONA.               Heaven doth truly know it.
  OTHELLO. Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
  DESDEMONA. To whom, my lord? with whom? how am I false?
  OTHELLO. O Desdemona! Away! away! away!
  DESDEMONA. Alas the heavy day! Why do you weep?
    Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
    If haply you my father do suspect
    An instrument of this your calling back,
    Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,
    Why, I have lost him too.  
  OTHELLO.                    Had it pleased heaven
    To try me with affliction, had they rain'd
    All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head,
    Steep'd me in poverty to the very lips,
    Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
    I should have found in some place of my soul
    A drop of patience; but, alas, to make me
    A fixed figure for the time of scorn
    To point his slow unmoving finger at!
    Yet could I bear that too, well, very well;
    But there, where I have garner'd up my heart,
    Where either I must live or bear no life;
    The fountain from the which my current runs,
    Or else dries up; to be discarded thence!
    Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
    To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there,
    Patience, thou young and rose-lipp'd cherubin,
    Ay, there, look grim as hell!
  DESDEMONA. I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
  OTHELLO. O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,  
    That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed,
    Who art so lovely fair and smell'st so sweet
    That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!
  DESDEMONA. Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
  OTHELLO. Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
    Made to write "whore" upon? What committed?
    Committed? O thou public commoner!
    I should make very forges of my cheeks,
    That would to cinders burn up modesty,
    Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed!
    Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
    The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets,
    Is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth,
    And will not hear it. What committed?
    Impudent strumpet!
  DESDEMONA.           By heaven, you do me wrong.
  OTHELLO. Are not you a strumpet?
  DESDEMONA.                       No, as I am a Christian.
    If to preserve this vessel for my lord
    From any other foul unlawful touch  
    Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
  OTHELLO. What, not a whore?
  DESDEMONA.                  No, as I shall be saved.
  OTHELLO. Is't possible?
  DESDEMONA. O, heaven forgive us!
  OTHELLO.                         I cry you mercy then;
    I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
    That married with Othello. [Raises his voice.] You, mistress,
    That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
    And keep the gate of hell!

                           Re-enter Emilia.

                               You, you, ay, you!
    We have done our course; there's money for your pains.
    I pray you, turn the key, and keep our counsel.             Exit.
  EMILIA. Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
    How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?
  DESDEMONA. Faith, half asleep.
  EMILIA. Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?  
  DESDEMONA. With who?
  EMILIA. Why, with my lord, madam.
  DESDEMONA. Who is thy lord?
  EMILIA.                     He that is yours, sweet lady.
  DESDEMONA. I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia;
    I cannot weep, nor answer have I none
    But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
    Lay on my bed my wedding sheets. Remember,
    And call thy husband hither.
  EMILIA.                        Here's a change indeed!
     Exit.
  DESDEMONA. 'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.
    How have I been behaved, that he might stick
    The small'st opinion on my least misuse?

                      Re-enter Emilia with Iago.

  IAGO. What is your pleasure, madam? How is't with you?
  DESDEMONA. I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
    Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.  
    He might have chid me so, for in good faith,
    I am a child to chiding.
  IAGO.                      What's the matter, lady?
  EMILIA. Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,
    Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her,
    As true hearts cannot bear.
  DESDEMONA. Am I that name, Iago?
  IAGO.                            What name, fair lady?
  DESDEMONA. Such as she says my lord did say I was.
  EMILIA. He call'd her whore; a beggar in his drink
    Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
  IAGO. Why did he so?
  DESDEMONA. I do not know; I am sure I am none such.
  IAGO. Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!
  EMILIA. Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
    Her father and her country and her friends,
    To be call'd whore? Would it not make one weep?
  DESDEMONA. It is my wretched fortune.
  IAGO.                                 Beshrew him for't!
    How comes this trick upon him?  
  DESDEMONA.                       Nay, heaven doth know.
  EMILIA. I will be hang'd, if some eternal villain,
    Some busy and insinuating rogue,
    Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
    Have not devised this slander; I'll be hang'd else.
  IAGO. Fie, there is no such man; it is impossible.
  DESDEMONA. If any such there be, heaven pardon him!
  EMILIA. A halter pardon him! And hell gnaw his bones!
    Why should he call her whore? Who keeps her company?
    What place? What time? What form? What likelihood?
    The Moor's abused by some most villainous knave,
    Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
    O heaven, that such companions thou'ldst unfold,
    And put in every honest hand a whip
    To lash the rascals naked through the world
    Even from the east to the west!
  IAGO.                             Speak within door.
  EMILIA. O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was
    That turn'd your wit the seamy side without,
    And made you to suspect me with the Moor.  
  IAGO. You are a fool; go to.
  DESDEMONA.                   O good Iago,
    What shall I do to win my lord again?
    Good friend, go to him, for by this light of heaven,
    I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel:
    If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love
    Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
    Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,
    Delighted them in any other form,
    Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
    And ever will, though he do shake me off
    To beggarly divorcement, love him dearly,
    Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much,
    And his unkindness may defeat my life,
    But never taint my love. I cannot say "whore."
    It doth abhor me now I speak the word;
    To do the act that might the addition earn
    Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.
  IAGO. I pray you, be content; 'tis but his humor:
    The business of the state does him offense,  
    And he does chide with you.
  DESDEMONA. If 'twere no other-
  IAGO. 'Tis but so, I warrant.                      Trumpets within.
    Hark, how these instruments summon to supper!
    The messengers of Venice stay the meat.
    Go in, and weep not; all things shall be well.
                                         Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.

                           Enter Roderigo.

    How now, Roderigo!
  RODERIGO. I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.
  IAGO. What in the contrary?
  RODERIGO. Every day thou daffest me with some device, Iago; and
    rather, as it seems to me now, keepest from me all conveniency
    than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope. I will indeed
    no longer endure it; nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace
    what already I have foolishly suffered.
  IAGO. Will you hear me, Roderigo?
  RODERIGO. Faith, I have heard too much, for your words and  
    performances are no kin together.
  IAGO. You charge me most unjustly.
  RODERIGO. With nought but truth. I have wasted myself out of my
    means. The jewels you have had from me to deliver to Desdemona
    would half have corrupted a votarist. You have told me she hath
    received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden
    respect and acquaintance; but I find none.
  IAGO. Well, go to, very well.
  RODERIGO. Very well! go to! I cannot go to, man; nor 'tis not very
    well. By this hand, I say 'tis very scurvy, and begin to find
    myself fopped in it.
  IAGO. Very well.
  RODERIGO. I tell you 'tis not very well. I will make myself known
    to Desdemona. If she will return me my jewels, I will give over
    my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation; if not, assure
    yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.
  IAGO. You have said now.
  RODERIGO. Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of
    doing.
  IAGO. Why, now I see there's mettle in thee; and even from this  
    instant do build on thee a better opinion than ever before. Give
    me thy hand, Roderigo. Thou hast taken against me a most just
    exception; but yet, I protest, have dealt most directly in thy
    affair.
  RODERIGO. It hath not appeared.
  IAGO. I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is
    not without wit and judgement. But, Roderigo, if thou hast that
    in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than
    ever, I mean purpose, courage, and valor, this night show it; if
    thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from
    this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.
  RODERIGO. Well, what is it? Is it within reason and compass?
  IAGO. Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute
    Cassio in Othello's place.
  RODERIGO. Is that true? Why then Othello and Desdemona return again
    to Venice.
  IAGO. O, no; he goes into Mauritania, and takes away with him the
    fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some
    accident; wherein none can be so determinate as the removing of
    Cassio.  
  RODERIGO. How do you mean, removing of him?
  IAGO. Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's place; knocking out
    his brains.
  RODERIGO. And that you would have me to do?
  IAGO. Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups
    tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him. He knows
    not yet of his honorable fortune. If you will watch his going
    thence, which his will fashion to fall out between twelve and
    one, you may take him at your pleasure; I will be near to second
    your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand not
    amazed at it, but go along with me; I will show you such a
    necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put
    it on him. It is now high supper-time, and the night grows to
    waste. About it.
  RODERIGO. I will hear further reason for this.
  IAGO. And you shall be satisfied.                           Exeunt.




SCENE III.
Another room in the castle.

Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia, and Attendants.

  LODOVICO. I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
  OTHELLO. O, pardon me; 'twill do me good to walk.
  LODOVICO. Madam, good night; I humbly thank your ladyship.
  DESDEMONA. Your honor is most welcome.
  OTHELLO.                               Will you walk, sir?
    O- Desdemona-
  DESDEMONA. My lord?
  OTHELLO. Get you to bed on the instant; I will be returned
    forthwith. Dismiss your attendant there; look it be done.
  DESDEMONA. I will, my lord.
                            Exeunt Othello, Lodovico, and Attendants.
  EMILIA. How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
  DESDEMONA. He says he will return incontinent.
    He hath commanded me to go to bed,
    And bade me to dismiss you.
  EMILIA.                       Dismiss me?
  DESDEMONA. It was his bidding; therefore, good Emilia,  
    Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
    We must not now displease him.
  EMILIA. I would you had never seen him!
  DESDEMONA. So would not I. My love doth so approve him,
    That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns-
    Prithee, unpin me- have grace and favor in them.
  EMILIA. I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
  DESDEMONA. All's one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds!
    If I do die before thee, prithee shroud me
    In one of those same sheets.
  EMILIA.                        Come, come, you talk.
  DESDEMONA. My mother had a maid call'd Barbary;
    She was in love, and he she loved proved mad
    And did forsake her. She had a song of "willow";
    An old thing 'twas, but it express'd her fortune,
    And she died singing it. That song tonight
    Will not go from my mind; I have much to do
    But to go hang my head all at one side
    And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.
  EMILIA. Shall I go fetch your nightgown?  
  DESDEMONA.                               No, unpin me here.
    This Lodovico is a proper man.
  EMILIA. A very handsome man.
  DESDEMONA. He speaks well.
  EMILIA. I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to
    Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
  DESDEMONA. [Sings.]

        "The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,
          Sing all a green willow;
        Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
          Sing willow, willow, willow.
        The fresh streams ran by her, and murmur'd her moans,
          Sing willow, willow, willow;
        Her salt tears fell from her, and soften'd the stones-"

    Lay be these-

    [Sings.]   "Sing willow, willow, willow-"
  
    Prithee, hie thee; he'll come anon-
    [Sings.]   "Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
               Let nobody blame him; his scorn I approve-"

    Nay, that's not next. Hark, who is't that knocks?
  EMILIA. It's the wind.
  DESDEMONA. [Sings.]

        "I call'd my love false love; but what said he then?
          Sing willow, willow, willow.
        If I court moe women, you'll couch with moe men-"

    So get thee gone; good night. Mine eyes do itch;
    Doth that bode weeping?
  EMILIA.                   'Tis neither here nor there.
  DESDEMONA. I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men!
    Dost thou in conscience think- tell me, Emilia-
    That there be women do abuse their husbands
    In such gross kind?
  EMILIA.               There be some such, no question.  
  DESDEMONA. Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
  EMILIA. Why, would not you?
  DESDEMONA.                  No, by this heavenly light!
  EMILIA. Nor I neither by this heavenly light; I might do't as well
    i' the dark.
  DESDEMONA. Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
  EMILIA. The world's a huge thing; it is a great price
    For a small vice.
  DESDEMONA.          In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
  EMILIA. In troth, I think I should, and undo't when I had done.
    Marry, I would not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for
    measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any
    petty exhibition; but, for the whole world- why, who would not
    make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? I should
    venture purgatory for't.
  DESDEMONA. Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong
    For the whole world.
  EMILIA. Why, the wrong is but a wrong i' the world; and having the
    world for your labor, 'tis a wrong in your own world, and you
    might quickly make it right.  
  DESDEMONA. I do not think there is any such woman.
  EMILIA. Yes, a dozen, and as many to the vantage as would store the
      world they played for.
    But I do think it is their husbands' faults
    If wives do fall; say that they slack their duties
    And pour our treasures into foreign laps,
    Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
    Throwing restraint upon us, or say they strike us,
    Or scant our former having in despite,
    Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,
    Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
    Their wives have sense like them; they see and smell
    And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
    As husbands have. What is it that they do
    When they change us for others? Is it sport?
    I think it is. And doth affection breed it?
    I think it doth. Is't frailty that thus errs?
    It is so too. And have not we affections,
    Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
    Then let them use us well; else let them know,  
    The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
  DESDEMONA. Good night, good night. Heaven me such uses send,
    Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!                Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
Cyprus. A street.

Enter Iago and Roderigo:

  IAGO. Here, stand behind this bulk; straight will he come.
    Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home.
    Quick, quick; fear nothing; I'll be at thy elbow.
    It makes us, or it mars us; think on that,
    And fix most firm thy resolution.
  RODERIGO. Be near at hand; I may miscarry in't.
  IAGO. Here, at thy hand, be bold, and take thy stand.
  Retires.
  RODERIGO. I have no great devotion to the deed;
    And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
    'Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword; he dies.
  IAGO. I have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense,
    And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
    Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
    Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo,
    He calls me to a restitution large
    Of gold and jewels that I bobb'd from him,  
    As gifts to Desdemona;
    It must not be. If Cassio do remain,
    He hath a daily beauty in his life
    That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor
    May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril.
    No, he must die. Be't so. I hear him coming.

                            Enter Cassio.

  RODERIGO. I know his gait; 'tis he. Villain, thou diest!
                                              Makes a pass at Cassio.
  CASSIO. That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
    But that my coat is better than thou know'st;
    I will make proof of thine.           Draws, and wounds Roderigo.
  RODERIGO.                     O, I am slain!
            Iago from behind wounds Cassio in the leg, and exit.
  CASSIO. I am maim'd forever. Help, ho! Murther! Murther!
    Falls.

                            Enter Othello.  

  OTHELLO. The voice of Cassio; Iago keeps his word.
  RODERIGO. O, villain that I am!
  OTHELLO.                        It is even so.
  CASSIO. O, help, ho! Light! A surgeon!
  OTHELLO. 'Tis he. O brave Iago, honest and just,
    That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!
    Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead,
    And your unblest fate hies. Strumpet, I come!
    Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted;
    Thy bed lust-stain'd shall with lust's blood be spotted.
     Exit.

                     Enter Lodovico and Gratiano.

  CASSIO. What, ho! No watch? No passage? Murther! Murther!
  GRATIANO. 'Tis some mischance; the cry is very direful.
  CASSIO. O, help!
  LODOVICO. Hark!
  RODERIGO. O wretched villain!  
  LODOVICO. Two or three groan; it is a heavy night.
    These may be counterfeits; let's think't unsafe
    To come in to the cry without more help.
  RODERIGO. Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.
  LODOVICO. Hark!

                     Re-enter Iago, with a light.

  GRATIANO. Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
  IAGO. Who's there? Whose noise is this that cries on murther?
  LODOVICO. We do not know.
  IAGO.                     Did not you hear a cry?
  CASSIO. Here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!
  IAGO.                                       What's the matter?
  GRATIANO. This is Othello's ancient, as I take it.
  LODOVICO. The same indeed; a very valiant fellow.
  IAGO. What are you here that cry so grievously?
  CASSIO. Iago? O, I am spoil'd, undone by villains!
    Give me some help.
  IAGO. O me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?  
  CASSIO. I think that one of them is hereabout,
    And cannot make away.
  IAGO.                   O treacherous villains!
    [To Lodovico and Gratiano.] What are you there?
    Come in and give some help.
  RODERIGO. O, help me here!
  CASSIO. That's one of them.
  IAGO.                       O murtherous slave! O villain!
                                                      Stabs Roderigo.
  RODERIGO. O damn'd Iago! O inhuman dog!
  IAGO. Kill men i' the dark! Where be these bloody thieves?
    How silent is this town! Ho! Murther! Murther!
    What may you be? Are you of good or evil?
  LODOVICO. As you shall prove us, praise us.
  IAGO. Signior Lodovico?
  LODOVICO. He, sir.
  IAGO. I cry you mercy. Here's Cassio hurt by villains.
  GRATIANO. Cassio?
  IAGO. How is't, brother?
  CASSIO. My leg is cut in two.  
  IAGO.                         Marry, heaven forbid!
    Light, gentlemen; I'll bind it with my shirt.

                            Enter Bianca.

  BIANCA. What is the matter, ho? Who is't that cried?
  IAGO. Who is't that cried?
  BIANCA. O my dear Cassio, my sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio,
     Cassio!
  IAGO. O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
    Who they should be that have thus mangled you?
  CASSIO. No.
  GRATIANO. I am sorry to find you thus; I have been to seek you.
  IAGO. Lend me a garter. So. O, for a chair,
    To bear him easily hence!
  BIANCA. Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
  IAGO. Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
    To be a party in this injury.
    Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come;
    Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?  
    Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
    Roderigo? No- yes, sure. O heaven! Roderigo.
  GRATIANO. What, of Venice?
  IAGO. Even he, sir. Did you know him?
  GRATIANO.                             Know him! ay.
  IAGO. Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon;
    These bloody accidents must excuse my manners,
    That so neglected you.
  GRATIANO.                I am glad to see you.
  IAGO. How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair!
  GRATIANO. Roderigo!
  IAGO. He, he, 'tis he. [A chair brought in.] O, that's well said:
      the chair.
    Some good man bear him carefully from hence;
    I'll fetch the general's surgeon. [To Bianca.] For you, mistress,
    Save you your labor. He that lies slain here, Cassio,
    Was my dear friend; what malice was between you?
  CASSIO. None in the world; nor do I know the man.
  IAGO. [To Bianca.] What, look you pale? O, bear him out o' the air.
                                   Cassio and Roderigo are borne off.  
    Stay you, good gentlemen. Look you pale, mistress?
    Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?
    Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.
    Behold her well; I pray you, look upon her.
    Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak,
    Though tongues were out of use.

                            Enter Emilia.

  EMILIA. 'Las, what's the matter? What's the matter, husband?
  IAGO. Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
    By Roderigo, and fellows that are 'scaped;
    He's almost slain, and Roderigo dead.
  EMILIA. Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio!
  IAGO. This is the fruit of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
    Go know of Cassio where he supp'd tonight.
    What, do you shake at that?
  BIANCA. He supp'd at my house; but I therefore shake not.
  IAGO. O, did he so? I charge you, go with me.
  EMILIA. Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet!  
  BIANCA. I am no strumpet, but of life as honest
    As you that thus abuse me.
  EMILIA.                      As I! foh! fie upon thee!
  IAGO. Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dress'd.
    Come, mistress, you must tell's another tale.
    Emilia, run you to the citadel,
    And tell my lord and lady what hath happ'd!
    Will you go on? [Aside.] This is the night
    That either makes me or fordoes me quite.                 Exeunt.




SCENE II.
A bedchamber in the castle. Desdemona in bed asleep; a light burning.

Enter Othello.

  OTHELLO. It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul.
    Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!
    It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood,
    Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow
    And smooth as monumental alabaster.
    Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.
    Put out the light, and then put out the light.
    If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
    I can again thy former light restore,
    Should I repent me; but once put out thy light,
    Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,
    I know not where is that Promethean heat
    That can thy light relume. When I have pluck'd the rose,
    I cannot give it vital growth again,
    It must needs wither; I'll smell it on the tree.      Kisses her.
    O, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
    Justice to break her sword! One more, one more;  
    Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
    And love thee after. One more, and this the last;
    So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep,
    But they are cruel tears; this sorrow's heavenly,
    It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
  DESDEMONA. Who's there? Othello?
  OTHELLO.                         Ay, Desdemona.
  DESDEMONA. Will you come to bed, my lord?
  OTHELLO. Have you pray'd tonight, Desdemona?
  DESDEMONA. Ay, my lord.
  OTHELLO. If you bethink yourself of any crime
    Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
    Solicit for it straight.
  DESDEMONA. Alas, my lord, what may you mean by that?
  OTHELLO. Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by.
    I would not kill thy unprepared spirit.
    No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.
  DESDEMONA. Talk you of killing?
  OTHELLO. Ay, I do.
  DESDEMONA. Then heaven have mercy on me!  
  OTHELLO. Amen, with all my heart!
  DESDEMONA. If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.
  OTHELLO. Hum!
  DESDEMONA. And yet I fear you, for you are fatal then
    When your eyes roll so. Why I should fear I know not,
    Since guiltiness I know not; but yet I feel I fear.
  OTHELLO. Think on thy sins.
  DESDEMONA.                  They are loves I bear to you.
  OTHELLO. Ay, and for that thou diest.
  DESDEMONA. That death's unnatural that kills for loving.
    Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
    Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.
    These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope,
    They do not point on me.
  OTHELLO.                   Peace, and be still!
  DESDEMONA. I will so. What's the matter?
  OTHELLO. That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee
    Thou gavest to Cassio.
  DESDEMONA.               No, by my life and soul!
    Send for the man, and ask him.  
  OTHELLO.                         Sweet soul, take heed,
    Take heed of perjury; thou are on thy deathbed.
  DESDEMONA. Ay, but not yet to die.
  OTHELLO.                           Yes, presently:
    Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin,
    For to deny each article with oath
    Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
    That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
  DESDEMONA. Then Lord have mercy on me!
  OTHELLO.                               I say, amen.
  DESDEMONA. And have you mercy too! I never did
    Offend you in my life; never loved Cassio
    But with such general warranty of heaven
    As I might love. I never gave him token.
  OTHELLO. By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in 's hand.
    O perjured woman! Thou dost stone my heart,
    And makest me call what I intend to do
    A murther, which I thought a sacrifice.
    I saw the handkerchief.
  DESDEMONA.                He found it then;  
    I never gave it him. Send for him hither;
    Let him confess a truth.
  OTHELLO.                   He hath confess'd.
  DESDEMONA. What, my lord?
  OTHELLO. That he hath used thee.
  DESDEMONA.                       How? unlawfully?
  OTHELLO. Ay.
  DESDEMONA. He will not say so.
  OTHELLO.                       No, his mouth is stopp'd;
    Honest Iago hath ta'en order for't.
  DESDEMONA. O, my fear interprets! What, is he dead?
  OTHELLO. Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
    Had stomach for them all.
  DESDEMONA. Alas, he is betray'd, and I undone!
  OTHELLO. Out, strumpet! Weep'st thou for him to my face?
  DESDEMONA. O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
  OTHELLO. Down, strumpet!
  DESDEMONA. Kill me tomorrow; let me live tonight!
  OTHELLO. Nay, if you strive-
  DESDEMONA. But half an hour!  
  OTHELLO.                     Being done, there is no pause.
  DESDEMONA. But while I say one prayer!
  OTHELLO.                        It is too late.     He stifles her.
  EMILIA. [Within.] My lord, my lord! What, ho! my lord, my lord!
  OTHELLO. What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?
    I that am cruel am yet merciful;
    I would not have thee linger in thy pain.
    So, so.
  EMILIA. [Within.] What, ho! my lord, my lord!
  OTHELLO.                                      Who's there?
  EMILIA. [Within.] O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you!
  OTHELLO. Yes, 'tis Emilia. By and by. She's dead.
    'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio's death.
    The noise was here. Ha! no more moving?
    Still as the grave. Shall she come in? were't good?
    I think she stirs again. No. What's best to do?
    If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife.
    My wife! My wife! What wife? I have no wife.
    O, insupportable! O heavy hour!
    Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse  
    Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe
    Should yawn at alteration.
  EMILIA. [Within.] I do beseech you
    That I may speak with you, O, good my lord!
  OTHELLO. I had forgot thee. O, come in, Emilia.
    Soft, by and by. Let me the curtains draw.
    Where art thou?                                 Unlocks the door.

                            Enter Emilia.

                    What's the matter with thee now?
  EMILIA. O, my good lord, yonder's foul murthers done!
  OTHELLO. What, now?
  EMILIA. But now, my lord.
  OTHELLO. It is the very error of the moon;
    She comes more nearer earth than she was wont
    And makes men mad.
  EMILIA. Cassio, my lord, hath kill'd a young Venetian
    Call'd Roderigo.
  OTHELLO.           Roderigo kill'd?  
    And Cassio kill'd?
  EMILIA.              No, Cassio is not kill'd.
  OTHELLO. Not Cassio kill'd! Then murther's out of tune,
    And sweet revenge grows harsh.
  DESDEMONA. O, falsely, falsely murther'd!
  EMILIA.                                   Alas, what cry is that?
  OTHELLO. That? what?
  EMILIA. Out, and alas! That was my lady's voice.
    Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again!
    Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!
  DESDEMONA. A guiltless death I die.
  EMILIA. O, who hath done this deed?
  DESDEMONA. Nobody; I myself. Farewell;
    Commend me to my kind lord. O, farewell!                    Dies.
  OTHELLO. Why, how should she be murther'd?
  EMILIA.                                    Alas, who knows?
  OTHELLO. You heard her say herself, it was not I.
  EMILIA. She said so; I must needs report the truth.
  OTHELLO. She's like a liar gone to burning hell;
    'Twas I that kill'd her.  
  EMILIA.                    O, the more angel she,
    And you the blacker devil!
  OTHELLO. She turn'd to folly, and she was a whore.
  EMILIA. Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
  OTHELLO. She was false as water.
  EMILIA.                          Thou art rash as fire, to say
    That she was false. O, she was heavenly true!
  OTHELLO. Cassio did top her; ask thy husband else.
    O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell,
    But that I did proceed upon just grounds
    To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
  EMILIA. My husband?
  OTHELLO. Thy husband.
  EMILIA. That she was false to wedlock?
  OTHELLO. Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,
    If heaven would make me such another world
    Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
    I'ld not have sold her for it.
  EMILIA.                          My husband?
  OTHELLO. Ay, 'twas he that told me first.  
    An honest man he is, and hates the slime
    That sticks on filthy deeds.
  EMILIA.                        My husband?
  OTHELLO. What needs this iteration, woman? I say thy husband.
  EMILIA. O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!
    My husband say that she was false!
  OTHELLO.                             He, woman;
    I say thy husband. Dost understand the word?
    My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.
  EMILIA. If he say so, may his pernicious soul
    Rot half a grain a day! He lies to the heart.
    She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
  OTHELLO. Ha!
  EMILIA. Do thy worst;
    This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
    Than thou wast worthy her.
  OTHELLO.                     Peace, you were best.
  EMILIA. Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
    As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt!
    As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed-  
    I care not for thy sword; I'll make thee known,
    Though I lost twenty lives. Help! help, ho! help!
    The Moor hath kill'd my mistress! Murther, murther!

              Enter Montano, Gratiano, Iago, and others.

  MONTANO. What is the matter? How now, general?
  EMILIA. O, are you come, Iago? You have done well,
    That men must lay their murthers on your neck.
  GRATIANO. What is the matter?
  EMILIA. Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man.
    He says thou told'st him that his wife was false;
    I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain.
    Speak, for my heart is full.
  IAGO. I told him what I thought, and told no more
    Than what he found himself was apt and true.
  EMILIA. But did you ever tell him she was false?
  IAGO. I did.
  EMILIA. You told a lie, an odious, damned lie;
    Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie!  
    She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?
  IAGO. With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.
  EMILIA. I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to speak.
    My mistress here lies murther'd in her bed-
  ALL. O heavens forfend!
  EMILIA. And your reports have set the murther on.
  OTHELLO. Nay, stare not, masters; it is true indeed.
  GRATIANO. 'Tis a strange truth.
  MONTANO. O monstrous act!
  EMILIA.                   Villainy, villainy, villainy!
    I think upon't, I think, I smell't, O villainy!
    I thought so then. I'll kill myself for grief.
    O villainy, villainy!
  IAGO. What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.
  EMILIA. Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak;
    'Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
    Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.
  OTHELLO. O! O! O!                                 Falls on the bed.
  EMILIA.           Nay, lay thee down and roar;
    For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent  
    That e'er did lift up eye.
  OTHELLO.            [Rises.] O, she was foul!
    I scarce did know you, uncle; there lies your niece,
    Whose breath indeed these hands have newly stopp'd.
    I know this act shows horrible and grim.
  GRATIANO. Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy father's dead.
    Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
    Shore his old thread in twain; did he live now,
    This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
    Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
    And fall to reprobation.
  OTHELLO. 'Tis pitiful, but yet Iago knows
    That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
    A thousand times committed. Cassio confess'd it,
    And she did gratify his amorous works
    With that recognizance and pledge of love
    Which I first gave her. I saw it in his hand,
    It was a handkerchief, an antique token
    My father gave my mother.
  EMILIA. O heaven! O heavenly powers!  
  IAGO. 'Zounds! Hold your peace.
  EMILIA.                         'Twill out, 'twill. I peace?
    No, I will speak as liberal as the north;
    Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
    All, all, cry shame against me, yet I'll speak.
  IAGO. Be wise, and get you home.
  EMILIA.                          I will not.
                                          Iago offers to stab Emilia.
  GRATIANO.                                    Fie!
    Your sword upon a woman?
  EMILIA. O thou dull Moor! That handkerchief thou speak'st of
    I found by fortune and did give my husband,
    For often with a solemn earnestness,
    More than indeed belong'd to such a trifle,
    He begg'd of me to steal it.
  IAGO.                          Villainous whore!
  EMILIA. She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it,
    And I did give't my husband.
  IAGO.                          Filth, thou liest!
  EMILIA. By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.  
    O murtherous coxcomb! What should such a fool
    Do with so good a wife?
  OTHELLO.                  Are there not stones in heaven
    But what serve for thunder? Precious villain!
                                         He runs at Iago, but Montano
                                      disarms him. Iago stabs Emilia.
  GRATIANO. The woman falls; sure, he hath kill'd his wife.
  EMILIA. Ay, ay! O, lay me by my mistress' side.          Exit Iago.
  GRATIANO. He's gone, but his wife's kill'd.
  MONTANO. 'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,
    Which I have here recover'd from the Moor.
    Come, guard the door without; let him not pass,
    But kill him rather. I'll after that same villain,
    For 'tis a damned slave.       Exeunt all but Othello and Emilia.
  OTHELLO.                   I am not valiant neither,
    But every puny whipster gets my sword.
    But why should honor outlive honesty?
    Let it go all.
  EMILIA.          What did thy song bode, lady?
    Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,  
    And die in music. [Sings.] "Willow, willow, willow."
    Moor, she was chaste; she loved thee, cruel Moor;
    So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;
    So speaking as I think, I die, I die.                       Dies.
  OTHELLO. I have another weapon in this chamber;
    It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper-
    O, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.
  GRATIANO. [Within.] If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear.
    Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.
  OTHELLO. Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
    Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.

                          Re-enter Gratiano.

  GRATIANO. What is the matter?
  OTHELLO.                      Behold, I have a weapon;
    A better never did itself sustain
    Upon a soldier's thigh. I have seen the day
    That with this little arm and this good sword
    I have made my way through more impediments  
    Than twenty times your stop. But, O vain boast!
    Who can control his fate? 'Tis not so now.
    Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon'd;
    Here is my journey's end, here is my butt
    And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
    Do you go back dismay'd? 'Tis a lost fear.
    Man but a rush against Othello's breast,
    And he retires. Where should Othello go?
    Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starr'd wench!
    Pale as thy smock! When we shall meet at compt,
    This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
    And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl?
    Even like thy chastity. O cursed, cursed slave!
    Whip me, ye devils,
    From the possession of this heavenly sight!
    Blow me about in winds! Roast me in sulphur!
    Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
    O Desdemon! dead, Desdemon! dead!
    O! O! O!
  
         Enter Lodovico, Montano, Cassio carried in a chair,
                  and Officers with Iago, prisoner.

  LODOVICO. Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
  OTHELLO. That's he that was Othello. Here I am.
  LODOVICO. Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
  OTHELLO. I look down towards his feet; but that's a fable.
    If that thou be'st a devil, I cannot kill thee.      Wounds Iago.
  LODOVICO. Wrench his sword from him.
  IAGO.                                I bleed, sir, but not kill'd.
  OTHELLO. I am not sorry neither. I'ld have thee live,
    For, in my sense, 'tis happiness to die.
  LODOVICO. O thou Othello, that wert once so good,
    Fall'n in the practice of a damned slave,
    What shall be said to thee?
  OTHELLO.                      Why, anything;
    An honorable murtherer, if you will,
    For nought did I in hate, but all in honor.
  LODOVICO. This wretch hath part confess'd his villainy.
    Did you and he consent in Cassio's death?  
  OTHELLO. Ay.
  CASSIO. Dear general, I never gave you cause.
  OTHELLO. I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
    Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
    Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
  IAGO. Demand me nothing; what you know, you know.
    From this time forth I never will speak word.
  LODOVICO. What, not to pray?
  GRATIANO.                    Torments will ope your lips.
  OTHELLO. Well, thou dost best.
  LODOVICO. Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n,
    Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
    Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
    And here another. The one of them imports
    The death of Cassio to be undertook
    By Roderigo.
  OTHELLO. O villain!
  CASSIO.             Most heathenish and most gross!
  LODOVICO. Now here's another discontented paper,
    Found in his pocket too; and this, it seems,  
    Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain;
    But that, belike, Iago in the interim
    Came in and satisfied him.
  OTHELLO.                     O the pernicious caitiff!
    How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
    That was my wife's?
  CASSIO.               I found it in my chamber;
    And he himself confess'd but even now
    That there he dropp'd it for a special purpose
    Which wrought to his desire.
  OTHELLO.                       O fool! fool! fool!
  CASSIO. There is besides in Roderigo's letter,
    How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
    Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
    That I was cast. And even but now he spake
    After long seeming dead, Iago hurt him,
    Iago set him on.
  LODOVICO. You must forsake this room, and go with us.
    Your power and your command is taken off,
    And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,  
    If there be any cunning cruelty
    That can torment him much and hold him long,
    It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
    Till that the nature of your fault be known
    To the Venetian state. Come, bring away.
  OTHELLO. Soft you; a word or two before you go.
    I have done the state some service, and they know't.
    No more of that. I pray you, in your letters,
    When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
    Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate,
    Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak
    Of one that loved not wisely but too well;
    Of one not easily jealous, but, being wrought,
    Perplex'd in the extreme; of one whose hand,
    Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away
    Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued eyes,
    Albeit unused to the melting mood,
    Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
    Their medicinal gum. Set you down this;
    And say besides, that in Aleppo once,  
    Where a malignant and a turban'd Turk
    Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
    I took by the throat the circumcised dog
    And smote him, thus.                               Stabs himself.
  LODOVICO. O bloody period!
  GRATIANO.                  All that's spoke is marr'd.
  OTHELLO. I kiss'd thee ere I kill'd thee. No way but this,
    Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
                                          Falls on the bed, and dies.
  CASSIO. This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon;
    For he was great of heart.
  LODOVICO.         [To Iago.] O Spartan dog,
    More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea!
    Look on the tragic loading of this bed;
    This is thy work. The object poisons sight;
    Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
    And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
    For they succeed on you. To you, Lord Governor,
    Remains the censure of this hellish villain,
    The time, the place, the torture. O, enforce it!  
    Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
    This heavy act with heavy heart relate.                   Exeunt.


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1596


KING RICHARD THE SECOND


by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  KING RICHARD THE SECOND
  JOHN OF GAUNT, Duke of Lancaster - uncle to the King
  EDMUND LANGLEY, Duke of York - uncle to the King
  HENRY, surnamed BOLINGBROKE, Duke of Hereford, son of
    John of Gaunt, afterwards King Henry IV
  DUKE OF AUMERLE, son of the Duke of York
  THOMAS MOWBRAY, Duke of Norfolk
  DUKE OF SURREY
  EARL OF SALISBURY
  EARL BERKELEY
  BUSHY - favourites of King Richard
  BAGOT -     "      "   "     "
  GREEN -     "      "   "     "
  EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND
  HENRY PERCY, surnamed HOTSPUR, his son
  LORD Ross                             LORD WILLOUGHBY
  LORD FITZWATER                        BISHOP OF CARLISLE
  ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER                  LORD MARSHAL
  SIR STEPHEN SCROOP                    SIR PIERCE OF EXTON
  CAPTAIN of a band of Welshmen         TWO GARDENERS  

  QUEEN to King Richard
  DUCHESS OF YORK
  DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER, widow of Thomas of Woodstock,
    Duke of Gloucester
  LADY attending on the Queen

  Lords, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers, Keeper, Messenger,
    Groom, and other Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
England and Wales


ACT I. SCENE I.
London. The palace

Enter RICHARD, JOHN OF GAUNT, with other NOBLES and attendants

  KING RICHARD. Old John of Gaunt, time-honoured Lancaster,
    Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
    Brought hither Henry Hereford, thy bold son,
    Here to make good the boist'rous late appeal,
    Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
    Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
  GAUNT. I have, my liege.
  KING RICHARD. Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him
    If he appeal the Duke on ancient malice,
    Or worthily, as a good subject should,
    On some known ground of treachery in him?
  GAUNT. As near as I could sift him on that argument,
    On some apparent danger seen in him
    Aim'd at your Highness-no inveterate malice.
  KING RICHARD. Then call them to our presence: face to face
    And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear  
    The accuser and the accused freely speak.
    High-stomach'd are they both and full of ire,
    In rage, deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.

         Enter BOLINGBROKE and MOWBRAY

  BOLINGBROKE. Many years of happy days befall
    My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!
  MOWBRAY. Each day still better other's happiness
    Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
    Add an immortal title to your crown!
  KING RICHARD. We thank you both; yet one but flatters us,
    As well appeareth by the cause you come;
    Namely, to appeal each other of high treason.
    Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
    Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
  BOLINGBROKE. First-heaven be the record to my speech!
    In the devotion of a subject's love,
    Tend'ring the precious safety of my prince,
    And free from other misbegotten hate,  
    Come I appellant to this princely presence.
    Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
    And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
    My body shall make good upon this earth,
    Or my divine soul answer it in heaven-
    Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
    Too good to be so, and too bad to live,
    Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
    The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
    Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
    With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat;
    And wish-so please my sovereign-ere I move,
    What my tongue speaks, my right drawn sword may prove.
  MOWBRAY. Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal.
    'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
    The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
    Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;
    The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this.
    Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
    As to be hush'd and nought at an to say.  
    First, the fair reverence of your Highness curbs me
    From giving reins and spurs to my free speech;
    Which else would post until it had return'd
    These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
    Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
    And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
    I do defy him, and I spit at him,
    Call him a slanderous coward and a villain;
    Which to maintain, I would allow him odds
    And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
    Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
    Or any other ground inhabitable
    Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
    Meantime let this defend my loyalty-
    By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie
  BOLINGBROKE. Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
    Disclaiming here the kindred of the King;
    And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
    Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
    If guilty dread have left thee so much strength  
    As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop.
    By that and all the rites of knighthood else
    Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
    What I have spoke or thou canst worst devise.
  MOWBRAY. I take it up; and by that sword I swear
    Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder
    I'll answer thee in any fair degree
    Or chivalrous design of knightly trial;
    And when I mount, alive may I not light
    If I be traitor or unjustly fight!
  KING RICHARD. What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
    It must be great that can inherit us
    So much as of a thought of ill in him.
  BOLINGBROKE. Look what I speak, my life shall prove it true-
    That Mowbray hath receiv'd eight thousand nobles
    In name of lendings for your Highness' soldiers,
    The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments
    Like a false traitor and injurious villain.
    Besides, I say and will in battle prove-
    Or here, or elsewhere to the furthest verge  
    That ever was survey'd by English eye-
    That all the treasons for these eighteen years
    Complotted and contrived in this land
    Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
    Further I say, and further will maintain
    Upon his bad life to make all this good,
    That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,
    Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
    And consequently, like a traitor coward,
    Sluic'd out his innocent soul through streams of blood;
    Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries,
    Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,
    To me for justice and rough chastisement;
    And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
    This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
  KING RICHARD. How high a pitch his resolution soars!
    Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?
  MOWBRAY. O, let my sovereign turn away his face
    And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
    Till I have told this slander of his blood  
    How God and good men hate so foul a liar.
  KING RICHARD. Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and cars.
    Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
    As he is but my father's brother's son,
    Now by my sceptre's awe I make a vow,
    Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood
    Should nothing privilege him nor partialize
    The unstooping firmness of my upright soul.
    He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou:
    Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.
  MOWBRAY. Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,
    Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
    Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
    Disburs'd I duly to his Highness' soldiers;
    The other part reserv'd I by consent,
    For that my sovereign liege was in my debt
    Upon remainder of a dear account
    Since last I went to France to fetch his queen:
    Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death-
    I slew him not, but to my own disgrace  
    Neglected my sworn duty in that case.
    For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
    The honourable father to my foe,
    Once did I lay an ambush for your life,
    A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul;
    But ere I last receiv'd the sacrament
    I did confess it, and exactly begg'd
    Your Grace's pardon; and I hope I had it.
    This is my fault. As for the rest appeal'd,
    It issues from the rancour of a villain,
    A recreant and most degenerate traitor;
    Which in myself I boldly will defend,
    And interchangeably hurl down my gage
    Upon this overweening traitor's foot
    To prove myself a loyal gentleman
    Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.
    In haste whereof, most heartily I pray
    Your Highness to assign our trial day.
  KING RICHARD. Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be rul'd by me;
    Let's purge this choler without letting blood-  
    This we prescribe, though no physician;
    Deep malice makes too deep incision.
    Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed:
    Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
    Good uncle, let this end where it begun;
    We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.
  GAUNT. To be a make-peace shall become my age.
    Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
  KING RICHARD. And, Norfolk, throw down his.
  GAUNT. When, Harry, when?
    Obedience bids I should not bid again.
  KING RICHARD. Norfolk, throw down; we bid.
    There is no boot.
  MOWBRAY. Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot;
    My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:
    The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
    Despite of death, that lives upon my grave
    To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.
    I am disgrac'd, impeach'd, and baffl'd here;
    Pierc'd to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,  
    The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
    Which breath'd this poison.
  KING RICHARD. Rage must be withstood:
    Give me his gage-lions make leopards tame.
  MOWBRAY. Yea, but not change his spots. Take but my shame,
    And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
    The purest treasure mortal times afford
    Is spotless reputation; that away,
    Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
    A jewel in a ten-times barr'd-up chest
    Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
    Mine honour is my life; both grow in one;
    Take honour from me, and my life is done:
    Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;
    In that I live, and for that will I die.
  KING RICHARD. Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.
  BOLINGBROKE. O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!
    Shall I seem crest-fallen in my father's sight?
    Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height
    Before this outdar'd dastard? Ere my tongue  
    Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong
    Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear
    The slavish motive of recanting fear,
    And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
    Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.
                                                      Exit GAUNT
  KING RICHARD. We were not born to sue, but to command;
    Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
    Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
    At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day.
    There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
    The swelling difference of your settled hate;
    Since we can not atone you, we shall see
    Justice design the victor's chivalry.
    Lord Marshal, command our officers-at-arms
    Be ready to direct these home alarms.                 Exeunt




SCENE 2.
London. The DUKE OF LANCASTER'S palace

Enter JOHN OF GAUNT with the DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER

  GAUNT. Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
    Doth more solicit me than your exclaims
    To stir against the butchers of his life!
    But since correction lieth in those hands
    Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
    Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven;
    Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
    Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.
  DUCHESS. Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
    Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
    Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
    Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,
    Or seven fair branches springing from one root.
    Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
    Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
    But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
    One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,  
    One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
    Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt;
    Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,
    By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
    Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! That bed, that womb,
    That mettle, that self mould, that fashion'd thee,
    Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
    Yet art thou slain in him. Thou dost consent
    In some large measure to thy father's death
    In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
    Who was the model of thy father's life.
    Call it not patience, Gaunt-it is despair;
    In suff'ring thus thy brother to be slaught'red,
    Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
    Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee.
    That which in mean men we entitle patience
    Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.
    What shall I say? To safeguard thine own life
    The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.
  GAUNT. God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,  
    His deputy anointed in His sight,
    Hath caus'd his death; the which if wrongfully,
    Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift
    An angry arm against His minister.
  DUCHESS. Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
  GAUNT. To God, the widow's champion and defence.
  DUCHESS. Why then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
    Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
    Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight.
    O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,
    That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
    Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
    Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom
    That they may break his foaming courser's back
    And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
    A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!
    Farewell, old Gaunt; thy sometimes brother's wife,
    With her companion, Grief, must end her life.
  GAUNT. Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry.
    As much good stay with thee as go with me!  
  DUCHESS. Yet one word more- grief boundeth where it falls,
    Not with the empty hollowness, but weight.
    I take my leave before I have begun,
    For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
    Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
    Lo, this is all- nay, yet depart not so;
    Though this be all, do not so quickly go;
    I shall remember more. Bid him- ah, what?-
    With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
    Alack, and what shall good old York there see
    But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,
    Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
    And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
    Therefore commend me; let him not come there
    To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.
    Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die;
    The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.          Exeunt




SCENE 3.
The lists at Coventry

Enter the LORD MARSHAL and the DUKE OF AUMERLE

  MARSHAL. My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm'd?
  AUMERLE. Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.
  MARSHAL. The Duke of Norfolk, spightfully and bold,
    Stays but the summons of the appelant's trumpet.
  AUMERLE. Why then, the champions are prepar'd, and stay
    For nothing but his Majesty's approach.

     The trumpets sound, and the KING enters with his nobles,
     GAUNT, BUSHY, BAGOT, GREEN, and others. When they are set,
     enter MOWBRAY, Duke of Nor folk, in arms, defendant, and
     a HERALD

  KING RICHARD. Marshal, demand of yonder champion
    The cause of his arrival here in arms;
    Ask him his name; and orderly proceed
    To swear him in the justice of his cause.
  MARSHAL. In God's name and the King's, say who thou art,  
    And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms;
    Against what man thou com'st, and what thy quarrel.
    Speak truly on thy knighthood and thy oath;
    As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!
  MOWBRAY. My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk;
    Who hither come engaged by my oath-
    Which God defend a knight should violate!-
    Both to defend my loyalty and truth
    To God, my King, and my succeeding issue,
    Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me;
    And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,
    To prove him, in defending of myself,
    A traitor to my God, my King, and me.
    And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

   The trumpets sound. Enter BOLINGBROKE, Duke of Hereford,
            appellant, in armour, and a HERALD

  KING RICHARD. Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,
    Both who he is and why he cometh hither  
    Thus plated in habiliments of war;
    And formally, according to our law,
    Depose him in the justice of his cause.
  MARSHAL. What is thy name? and wherefore com'st thou hither
    Before King Richard in his royal lists?
    Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel?
    Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
  BOLINGBROKE. Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
    Am I; who ready here do stand in arms
    To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour,
    In lists on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
    That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,
    To God of heaven, King Richard, and to me.
    And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
  MARSHAL. On pain of death, no person be so bold
    Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
    Except the Marshal and such officers
    Appointed to direct these fair designs.
  BOLINGBROKE. Lord Marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand,
    And bow my knee before his Majesty;  
    For Mowbray and myself are like two men
    That vow a long and weary pilgrimage.
    Then let us take a ceremonious leave
    And loving farewell of our several friends.
  MARSHAL. The appellant in all duty greets your Highness,
    And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
  KING RICHARD. We will descend and fold him in our arms.
    Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
    So be thy fortune in this royal fight!
    Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed,
    Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
  BOLINGBROKE. O, let no noble eye profane a tear
    For me, if I be gor'd with Mowbray's spear.
    As confident as is the falcon's flight
    Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
    My loving lord, I take my leave of you;
    Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;
    Not sick, although I have to do with death,
    But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
    Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet  
    The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.
    O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
    Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
    Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up
    To reach at victory above my head,
    Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers,
    And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,
    That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat
    And furbish new the name of John o' Gaunt,
    Even in the lusty haviour of his son.
  GAUNT. God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!
    Be swift like lightning in the execution,
    And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
    Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
    Of thy adverse pernicious enemy.
    Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant, and live.
  BOLINGBROKE. Mine innocence and Saint George to thrive!
  MOWBRAY. However God or fortune cast my lot,
    There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
    A loyal, just, and upright gentleman.  
    Never did captive with a freer heart
    Cast off his chains of bondage, and embrace
    His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,
    More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
    This feast of battle with mine adversary.
    Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,
    Take from my mouth the wish of happy years.
    As gentle and as jocund as to jest
    Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.
  KING RICHARD. Farewell, my lord, securely I espy
    Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.
    Order the trial, Marshal, and begin.
  MARSHAL. Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
    Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!
  BOLINGBROKE. Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.
  MARSHAL. [To an officer] Go bear this lance to Thomas,
      Duke of Norfolk.
  FIRST HERALD. Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
    Stands here for God, his sovereign, and himself,
    On pain to be found false and recreant,  
    To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
    A traitor to his God, his King, and him;
    And dares him to set forward to the fight.
  SECOND HERALD. Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
    On pain to be found false and recreant,
    Both to defend himself, and to approve
    Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
    To God, his sovereign, and to him disloyal,
    Courageously and with a free desire
    Attending but the signal to begin.
  MARSHAL. Sound trumpets; and set forward, combatants.
                                           [A charge sounded]
    Stay, the King hath thrown his warder down.
  KING RICHARD. Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
    And both return back to their chairs again.
    Withdraw with us; and let the trumpets sound
    While we return these dukes what we decree.

    A long flourish, while the KING consults his Council
  
    Draw near,
    And list what with our council we have done.
    For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd
    With that dear blood which it hath fostered;
    And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
    Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword;
    And for we think the eagle-winged pride
    Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
    With rival-hating envy, set on you
    To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle
    Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;
    Which so rous'd up with boist'rous untun'd drums,
    With harsh-resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,
    And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,
    Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
    And make us wade even in our kindred's blood-
    Therefore we banish you our territories.
    You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
    Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields
    Shall not regreet our fair dominions,  
    But tread the stranger paths of banishment.
  BOLINGBROKE. Your will be done. This must my comfort be-
    That sun that warms you here shall shine on me,
    And those his golden beams to you here lent
    Shall point on me and gild my banishment.
  KING RICHARD. Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
    Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:
    The sly slow hours shall not determinate
    The dateless limit of thy dear exile;
    The hopeless word of 'never to return'
    Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
  MOWBRAY. A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
    And all unlook'd for from your Highness' mouth.
    A dearer merit, not so deep a maim
    As to be cast forth in the common air,
    Have I deserved at your Highness' hands.
    The language I have learnt these forty years,
    My native English, now I must forgo;
    And now my tongue's use is to me no more
    Than an unstringed viol or a harp;  
    Or like a cunning instrument cas'd up
    Or, being open, put into his hands
    That knows no touch to tune the harmony.
    Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
    Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips;
    And dull, unfeeling, barren ignorance
    Is made my gaoler to attend on me.
    I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
    Too far in years to be a pupil now.
    What is thy sentence, then, but speechless death,
    Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
  KING RICHARD. It boots thee not to be compassionate;
    After our sentence plaining comes too late.
  MOWBRAY. Then thus I turn me from my countrv's light,
    To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
  KING RICHARD. Return again, and take an oath with thee.
    Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands;
    Swear by the duty that you owe to God,
    Our part therein we banish with yourselves,
    To keep the oath that we administer:  
    You never shall, so help you truth and God,
    Embrace each other's love in banishment;
    Nor never look upon each other's face;
    Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
    This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;
    Nor never by advised purpose meet
    To plot, contrive, or complot any ill,
    'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.
  BOLINGBROKE. I swear.
  MOWBRAY. And I, to keep all this.
  BOLINGBROKE. Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy.
    By this time, had the King permitted us,
    One of our souls had wand'red in the air,
    Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
    As now our flesh is banish'd from this land-
    Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm;
    Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
    The clogging burden of a guilty soul.
  MOWBRAY. No, Bolingbroke; if ever I were traitor,
    My name be blotted from the book of life,  
    And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!
    But what thou art, God, thou, and I, do know;
    And all too soon, I fear, the King shall rue.
    Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray:
    Save back to England, an the world's my way.            Exit
  KING RICHARD. Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
    I see thy grieved heart. Thy sad aspect
    Hath from the number of his banish'd years
    Pluck'd four away. [To BOLINGBROKE] Six frozen winters spent,
    Return with welcome home from banishment.
  BOLINGBROKE. How long a time lies in one little word!
    Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
    End in a word: such is the breath of Kings.
  GAUNT. I thank my liege that in regard of me
    He shortens four years of my son's exile;
    But little vantage shall I reap thereby,
    For ere the six years that he hath to spend
    Can change their moons and bring their times about,
    My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light
    Shall be extinct with age and endless night;  
    My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
    And blindfold death not let me see my son.
  KING RICHARD. Why, uncle, thou hast many years to live.
  GAUNT. But not a minute, King, that thou canst give:
    Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow
    And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;
    Thou can'st help time to furrow me with age,
    But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;
    Thy word is current with him for my death,
    But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
  KING RICHARD. Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,
    Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave.
    Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
  GAUNT. Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
    You urg'd me as a judge; but I had rather
    You would have bid me argue like a father.
    O, had it been a stranger, not my child,
    To smooth his fault I should have been more mild.
    A partial slander sought I to avoid,
    And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.  
    Alas, I look'd when some of you should say
    I was too strict to make mine own away;
    But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue
    Against my will to do myself this wrong.
  KING RICHARD. Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so.
    Six years we banish him, and he shall go.
                                  Flourish. Exit KING with train
  AUMERLE. Cousin, farewell; what presence must not know,
    From where you do remain let paper show.
  MARSHAL. My lord, no leave take I, for I will ride
    As far as land will let me by your side.
  GAUNT. O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
    That thou returnest no greeting to thy friends?
  BOLINGBROKE. I have too few to take my leave of you,
    When the tongue's office should be prodigal
    To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.
  GAUNT. Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
  BOLINGBROKE. Joy absent, grief is present for that time.
  GAUNT. What is six winters? They are quickly gone.
  BOLINGBROKE. To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.  
  GAUNT. Call it a travel that thou tak'st for pleasure.
  BOLINGBROKE. My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
    Which finds it an enforced pilgrimage.
  GAUNT. The sullen passage of thy weary steps
    Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set
    The precious jewel of thy home return.
  BOLINGBROKE. Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make
    Will but remember me what a deal of world
    I wander from the jewels that I love.
    Must I not serve a long apprenticehood
    To foreign passages; and in the end,
    Having my freedom, boast of nothing else
    But that I was a journeyman to grief?
  GAUNT. All places that the eye of heaven visits
    Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
    Teach thy necessity to reason thus:
    There is no virtue like necessity.
    Think not the King did banish thee,
    But thou the King. Woe doth the heavier sit
    Where it perceives it is but faintly home.  
    Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour,
    And not the King exil'd thee; or suppose
    Devouring pestilence hangs in our air
    And thou art flying to a fresher clime.
    Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
    To lie that way thou goest, not whence thou com'st.
    Suppose the singing birds musicians,
    The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd,
    The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more
    Than a delightful measure or a dance;
    For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite
    The man that mocks at it and sets it light.
  BOLINGBROKE. O, who can hold a fire in his hand
    By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
    Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
    By bare imagination of a feast?
    Or wallow naked in December snow
    By thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
    O, no! the apprehension of the good
    Gives but the greater feeling to the worse.  
    Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
    Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.
  GAUNT. Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way.
    Had I thy youtli and cause, I would not stay.
  BOLINGBROKE. Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;
    My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
    Where'er I wander, boast of this I can:
    Though banish'd, yet a trueborn English man.          Exeunt




SCENE 4.
London. The court

Enter the KING, with BAGOT and GREEN, at one door;
and the DUKE OF AUMERLE at another

  KING RICHARD. We did observe. Cousin Aumerle,
    How far brought you high Hereford on his way?
  AUMERLE. I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
    But to the next high way, and there I left him.
  KING RICHARD. And say, what store of parting tears were shed?
  AUMERLE. Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,
    Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
    Awak'd the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
    Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
  KING RICHARD. What said our cousin when you parted with him?
  AUMERLE. 'Farewell.'
    And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
    Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
    To counterfeit oppression of such grief
    That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.
    Marry, would the word 'farewell' have length'ned hours  
    And added years to his short banishment,
    He should have had a volume of farewells;
    But since it would not, he had none of me.
  KING RICHARD. He is our cousin, cousin; but 'tis doubt,
    When time shall call him home from banishment,
    Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
    Ourself, and Bushy, Bagot here, and Green,
    Observ'd his courtship to the common people;
    How he did seem to dive into their hearts
    With humble and familiar courtesy;
    What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
    Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
    And patient underbearing of his fortune,
    As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
    Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;
    A brace of draymen bid God speed him well
    And had the tribute of his supple knee,
    With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends';
    As were our England in reversion his,
    And he our subjects' next degree in hope.  
  GREEN. Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts!
    Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
    Expedient manage must be made, my liege,
    Ere further leisure yicld them further means
    For their advantage and your Highness' loss.
  KING RICHARD. We will ourself in person to this war;
    And, for our coffers, with too great a court
    And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
    We are enforc'd to farm our royal realm;
    The revenue whereof shall furnish us
    For our affairs in hand. If that come short,
    Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters;
    Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
    They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold,
    And send them after to supply our wants;
    For we will make for Ireland presently.

                     Enter BUSHY

    Bushy, what news?  
  BUSHY. Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
    Suddenly taken; and hath sent poste-haste
    To entreat your Majesty to visit him.
  KING RICHARD. Where lies he?
  BUSHY. At Ely House.
  KING RICHARD. Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
    To help him to his grave immediately!
    The lining of his coffers shall make coats
    To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
    Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him.
    Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!
  ALL. Amen.                                              Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.
London. Ely House

Enter JOHN OF GAUNT, sick, with the DUKE OF YORK, etc.

  GAUNT. Will the King come, that I may breathe my last
    In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?
  YORK. Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;
    For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
  GAUNT. O, but they say the tongues of dying men
    Enforce attention like deep harmony.
    Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain;
    For they breathe truth that breathe their words -in pain.
    He that no more must say is listen'd more
    Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;
    More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before.
    The setting sun, and music at the close,
    As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
    Writ in remembrance more than things long past.
    Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
    My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
  YORK. No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,  
    As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,
    Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound
    The open ear of youth doth always listen;
    Report of fashions in proud Italy,
    Whose manners still our tardy apish nation
    Limps after in base imitation.
    Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity-
    So it be new, there's no respect how vile-
    That is not quickly buzz'd into his ears?
    Then all too late comes counsel to be heard
    Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
    Direct not him whose way himself will choose.
    'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.
  GAUNT. Methinks I am a prophet new inspir'd,
    And thus expiring do foretell of him:
    His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,
    For violent fires soon burn out themselves;
    Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;
    He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;
    With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder;  
    Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
    Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
    This royal throne of kings, this scept'red isle,
    This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
    This other Eden, demi-paradise,
    This fortress built by Nature for herself
    Against infection and the hand of war,
    This happy breed of men, this little world,
    This precious stone set in the silver sea,
    Which serves it in the office of a wall,
    Or as a moat defensive to a house,
    Against the envy of less happier lands;
    This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
    This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
    Fear'd by their breed, and famous by their birth,
    Renowned for their deeds as far from home,
    For Christian service and true chivalry,
    As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry
    Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son;
    This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,  
    Dear for her reputation through the world,
    Is now leas'd out-I die pronouncing it-
    Like to a tenement or pelting farm.
    England, bound in with the triumphant sea,
    Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
    Of wat'ry Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
    With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds;
    That England, that was wont to conquer others,
    Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
    Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
    How happy then were my ensuing death!

    Enter KING and QUEEN, AUMERLE, BUSHY, GREEN, BAGOT,
                Ross, and WILLOUGHBY

  YORK. The King is come; deal mildly with his youth,
    For young hot colts being rag'd do rage the more.
  QUEEN. How fares our noble uncle Lancaster?
  KING RICHARD. What comfort, man? How is't with aged Gaunt?
  GAUNT. O, how that name befits my composition!  
    Old Gaunt, indeed; and gaunt in being old.
    Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;
    And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
    For sleeping England long time have I watch'd;
    Watching breeds leanness, leanness is an gaunt.
    The pleasure that some fathers feed upon
    Is my strict fast-I mean my children's looks;
    And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt.
    Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
    Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.
  KING RICHARD. Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
  GAUNT. No, misery makes sport to mock itself:
    Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
    I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.
  KING RICHARD. Should dying men flatter with those that live?
  GAUNT. No, no; men living flatter those that die.
  KING RICHARD. Thou, now a-dying, sayest thou flatterest me.
  GAUNT. O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.
  KING RICHARD. I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.
  GAUNT. Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;  
    Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
    Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land
    Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;
    And thou, too careless patient as thou art,
    Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure
    Of those physicians that first wounded thee:
    A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,
    Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;
    And yet, incaged in so small a verge,
    The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
    O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye
    Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
    From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
    Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,
    Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.
    Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
    It were a shame to let this land by lease;
    But for thy world enjoying but this land,
    Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
    Landlord of England art thou now, not King.  
    Thy state of law is bondslave to the law;
    And thou-
  KING RICHARD. A lunatic lean-witted fool,
    Presuming on an ague's privilege,
    Darest with thy frozen admonition
    Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
    With fury from his native residence.
    Now by my seat's right royal majesty,
    Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
    This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
    Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
  GAUNT. O, Spare me not, my brother Edward's son,
    For that I was his father Edward's son;
    That blood already, like the pelican,
    Hast thou tapp'd out, and drunkenly carous'd.
    My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul-
    Whom fair befall in heaven 'mongst happy souls!-
    May be a precedent and witness good
    That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood.
    Join with the present sickness that I have;  
    And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
    To crop at once a too long withered flower.
    Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
    These words hereafter thy tormentors be!
    Convey me to my bed, then to my grave.
    Love they to live that love and honour have.
                               Exit, borne out by his attendants
  KING RICHARD. And let them die that age and sullens have;
    For both hast thou, and both become the grave.
  YORK. I do beseech your Majesty impute his words
    To wayward sickliness and age in him.
    He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear
    As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.
  KING RICHARD. Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;
    As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.

                Enter NORTHUMBERLAND

  NORTHUMBERLAND. My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your Majesty.
  KING RICHARD. What says he?  
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Nay, nothing; all is said.
    His tongue is now a stringless instrument;
    Words, life, and all, old Lancaster hath spent.
  YORK. Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
    Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.
  KING RICHARD. The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;
    His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.
    So much for that. Now for our Irish wars.
    We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,
    Which live like venom where no venom else
    But only they have privilege to live.
    And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
    Towards our assistance we do seize to us
    The plate, coin, revenues, and moveables,
    Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.
  YORK. How long shall I be patient? Ah, how long
    Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
    Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment,
    Nor Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,
    Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke  
    About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
    Have ever made me sour my patient cheek
    Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.
    I am the last of noble Edward's sons,
    Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first.
    In war was never lion rag'd more fierce,
    In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
    Than was that young and princely gentleman.
    His face thou hast, for even so look'd he,
    Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours;
    But when he frown'd, it was against the French
    And not against his friends. His noble hand
    Did win what he did spend, and spent not that
    Which his triumphant father's hand had won.
    His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,
    But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
    O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,
    Or else he never would compare between-
  KING RICHARD. Why, uncle, what's the matter?
  YORK. O my liege,  
    Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleas'd
    Not to be pardoned, am content withal.
    Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
    The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?
    Is not Gaunt dead? and doth not Hereford live?
    Was not Gaunt just? and is not Harry true?
    Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
    Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
    Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time
    His charters and his customary rights;
    Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;
    Be not thyself-for how art thou a king
    But by fair sequence and succession?
    Now, afore God-God forbid I say true!-
    If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
    Call in the letters patents that he hath
    By his attorneys-general to sue
    His livery, and deny his off'red homage,
    You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
    You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts,  
    And prick my tender patience to those thoughts
    Which honour and allegiance cannot think.
  KING RICHARD. Think what you will, we seize into our hands
    His plate, his goods, his money, and his lands.
  YORK. I'll not be by the while. My liege, farewell.
    What will ensue hereof there's none can tell;
    But by bad courses may be understood
    That their events can never fall out good.              Exit
  KING RICHARD. Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight;
    Bid him repair to us to Ely House
    To see this business. To-morrow next
    We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow.
    And we create, in absence of ourself,
    Our Uncle York Lord Governor of England;
    For he is just, and always lov'd us well.
    Come on, our queen; to-morrow must we part;
    Be merry, for our time of stay is short.
                   Flourish. Exeunt KING, QUEEN, BUSHY, AUMERLE,
                                                GREEN, and BAGOT
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.  
    Ross. And living too; for now his son is Duke.
  WILLOUGHBY. Barely in title, not in revenues.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Richly in both, if justice had her right.
  ROSS. My heart is great; but it must break with silence,
    Ere't be disburdened with a liberal tongue.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak more
    That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
  WILLOUGHBY. Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
    If it be so, out with it boldly, man;
    Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
  ROSS. No good at all that I can do for him;
    Unless you call it good to pity him,
    Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne
    In him, a royal prince, and many moe
    Of noble blood in this declining land.
    The King is not himself, but basely led
    By flatterers; and what they will inform,
    Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us an,
    That will the King severely prosecute  
    'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
  ROSS. The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes;
    And quite lost their hearts; the nobles hath he find
    For ancient quarrels and quite lost their hearts.
  WILLOUGHBY. And daily new exactions are devis'd,
    As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what;
    But what, a God's name, doth become of this?
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Wars hath not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not,
    But basely yielded upon compromise
    That which his noble ancestors achiev'd with blows.
    More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
  ROSS. The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
  WILLOUGHBY. The King's grown bankrupt like a broken man.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
  ROSS. He hath not money for these Irish wars,
    His burdenous taxations notwithstanding,
    But by the robbing of the banish'd Duke.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. His noble kinsman-most degenerate king!
    But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
    Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm;  
    We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
    And yet we strike not, but securely perish.
  ROSS. We see the very wreck that we must suffer;
    And unavoided is the danger now
    For suffering so the causes of our wreck.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death
    I spy life peering; but I dare not say
    How near the tidings of our comfort is.
  WILLOUGHBY. Nay, let us share thy thoughts as thou dost ours.
  ROSS. Be confident to speak, Northumberland.
    We three are but thyself, and, speaking so,
    Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore be bold.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Then thus: I have from Le Port Blanc, a bay
    In Brittany, receiv'd intelligence
    That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,
    That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
    His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,
    Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,
    Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton, and Francis Quoint-
    All these, well furnish'd by the Duke of Britaine,  
    With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
    Are making hither with all due expedience,
    And shortly mean to touch our northern shore.
    Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
    The first departing of the King for Ireland.
    If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
    Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
    Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,
    Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt,
    And make high majesty look like itself,
    Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;
    But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
    Stay and be secret, and myself will go.
  ROSS. To horse, to horse! Urge doubts to them that fear.
  WILLOUGHBY. Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 2.
Windsor Castle

Enter QUEEN, BUSHY, and BAGOT

  BUSHY. Madam, your Majesty is too much sad.
    You promis'd, when you parted with the King,
    To lay aside life-harming heaviness
    And entertain a cheerful disposition.
  QUEEN. To please the King, I did; to please myself
    I cannot do it; yet I know no cause
    Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
    Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
    As my sweet Richard. Yet again methinks
    Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,
    Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
    With nothing trembles. At some thing it grieves
    More than with parting from my lord the King.
  BUSHY. Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,
    Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;
    For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,
    Divides one thing entire to many objects,  
    Like perspectives which, rightly gaz'd upon,
    Show nothing but confusion-ey'd awry,
    Distinguish form. So your sweet Majesty,
    Looking awry upon your lord's departure,
    Find shapes of grief more than himself to wail;
    Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows
    Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious Queen,
    More than your lord's departure weep not-more is not seen;
    Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,
    Which for things true weeps things imaginary.
  QUEEN. It may be so; but yet my inward soul
    Persuades me it is otherwise. Howe'er it be,
    I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad
    As-though, on thinking, on no thought I think-
    Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
  BUSHY. 'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.
  QUEEN. 'Tis nothing less: conceit is still deriv'd
    From some forefather grief; mine is not so,
    For nothing hath begot my something grief,
    Or something hath the nothing that I grieve;  
    'Tis in reversion that I do possess-
    But what it is that is not yet known what,
    I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.

                   Enter GREEN

  GREEN. God save your Majesty! and well met, gentlemen.
    I hope the King is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.
  QUEEN. Why hopest thou so? 'Tis better hope he is;
    For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope.
    Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?
  GREEN. That he, our hope, might have retir'd his power
    And driven into despair an enemy's hope
    Who strongly hath set footing in this land.
    The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself,
    And with uplifted arms is safe arriv'd
    At Ravenspurgh.
  QUEEN. Now God in heaven forbid!
  GREEN. Ah, madam, 'tis too true; and that is worse,
    The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,  
    The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,
    With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.
  BUSHY. Why have you not proclaim'd Northumberland
    And all the rest revolted faction traitors?
  GREEN. We have; whereupon the Earl of Worcester
    Hath broken his staff, resign'd his stewardship,
    And all the household servants fled with him
    To Bolingbroke.
  QUEEN. So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
    And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir.
    Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy;
    And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,
    Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.
  BUSHY. Despair not, madam.
  QUEEN. Who shall hinder me?
    I will despair, and be at enmity
    With cozening hope-he is a flatterer,
    A parasite, a keeper-back of death,
    Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
    Which false hope lingers in extremity.  

                    Enter YORK

  GREEN. Here comes the Duke of York.
  QUEEN. With signs of war about his aged neck.
    O, full of careful business are his looks!
    Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.
  YORK. Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts.
    Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth,
    Where nothing lives but crosses, cares, and grief.
    Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
    Whilst others come to make him lose at home.
    Here am I left to underprop his land,
    Who, weak with age, cannot support myself.
    Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
    Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.

                   Enter a SERVINGMAN

  SERVINGMAN. My lord, your son was gone before I came.  
  YORK. He was-why so go all which way it will!
    The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold
    And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.
    Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
    Bid her send me presently a thousand pound.
    Hold, take my ring.
  SERVINGMAN. My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,
    To-day, as I came by, I called there-
    But I shall grieve you to report the rest.
  YORK. What is't, knave?
  SERVINGMAN. An hour before I came, the Duchess died.
  YORK. God for his mercy! what a tide of woes
    Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
    I know not what to do. I would to God,
    So my untruth had not provok'd him to it,
    The King had cut off my head with my brother's.
    What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland?
    How shall we do for money for these wars?
    Come, sister-cousin, I would say-pray, pardon me.
    Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts,  
    And bring away the armour that is there.
                                                 Exit SERVINGMAN
    Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
    If I know how or which way to order these affairs
    Thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
    Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen.
    T'one is my sovereign, whom both my oath
    And duty bids defend; t'other again
    Is my kinsman, whom the King hath wrong'd,
    Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
    Well, somewhat we must do.-Come, cousin,
    I'll dispose of you. Gentlemen, go muster up your men
    And meet me presently at Berkeley.
    I should to Plashy too,
    But time will not permit. All is uneven,
    And everything is left at six and seven.
                                           Exeunt YORK and QUEEN
  BUSHY. The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland.
    But none returns. For us to levy power
    Proportionable to the enemy  
    Is all unpossible.
  GREEN. Besides, our nearness to the King in love
    Is near the hate of those love not the King.
  BAGOT. And that is the wavering commons; for their love
    Lies in their purses; and whoso empties them,
    By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
  BUSHY. Wherein the King stands generally condemn'd.
  BAGOT. If judgment lie in them, then so do we,
    Because we ever have been near the King.
  GREEN. Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristow Castle.
    The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
  BUSHY. Thither will I with you; for little office
    Will the hateful commons perform for us,
    Except Eke curs to tear us all to pieces.
    Will you go along with us?
  BAGOT. No; I will to Ireland to his Majesty.
    Farewell. If heart's presages be not vain,
    We three here part that ne'er shall meet again.
  BUSHY. That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.
  GREEN. Alas, poor Duke! the task he undertakes  
    Is numb'ring sands and drinking oceans dry.
    Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
    Farewell at once-for once, for all, and ever.
  BUSHY. Well, we may meet again.
  BAGOT. I fear me, never.                                Exeunt




SCENE 3.
Gloucestershire

Enter BOLINGBROKE and NORTHUMBERLAND, forces

  BOLINGBROKE. How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Believe me, noble lord,
    I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire.
    These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
    Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome;
    And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
    Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
    But I bethink me what a weary way
    From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found
    In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
    Which, I protest, hath very much beguil'd
    The tediousness and process of my travel.
    But theirs is sweet'ned with the hope to have
    The present benefit which I possess;
    And hope to joy is little less in joy
    Than hope enjoy'd. By this the weary lords
    Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done  
    By sight of what I have, your noble company.
  BOLINGBROKE. Of much less value is my company
    Than your good words. But who comes here?

                 Enter HARRY PERCY

  NORTHUMBERLAND. It is my son, young Harry Percy,
    Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.
    Harry, how fares your uncle?
  PERCY. I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Why, is he not with the Queen?
  PERCY. No, my good lord; he hath forsook the court,
    Broken his staff of office, and dispers'd
    The household of the King.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. What was his reason?
    He was not so resolv'd when last we spake together.
  PERCY. Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
    But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,
    To offer service to the Duke of Hereford;
    And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover  
    What power the Duke of York had levied there;
    Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?
  PERCY. No, my good lord; for that is not forgot
    Which ne'er I did remember; to my knowledge,
    I never in my life did look on him.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Then learn to know him now; this is the Duke.
  PERCY. My gracious lord, I tender you my service,
    Such as it is, being tender, raw, and young;
    Which elder days shall ripen, and confirm
    To more approved service and desert.
  BOLINGBROKE. I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure
    I count myself in nothing else so happy
    As in a soul rememb'ring my good friends;
    And as my fortune ripens with thy love,
    It shall be still thy true love's recompense.
    My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. How far is it to Berkeley? And what stir
    Keeps good old York there with his men of war?
  PERCY. There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,  
    Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard;
    And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour-
    None else of name and noble estimate.

                  Enter Ross and WILLOUGHBY

  NORTHUMBERLAND. Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
    Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.
  BOLINGBROKE. Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues
    A banish'd traitor. All my treasury
    Is yet but unfelt thanks, which, more enrich'd,
    Shall be your love and labour's recompense.
  ROSS. Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.
  WILLOUGHBY. And far surmounts our labour to attain it.
  BOLINGBROKE. Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;
    Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,
    Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?

                     Enter BERKELEY
  
  NORTHUMBERLAND. It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.
  BERKELEY. My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.
  BOLINGBROKE. My lord, my answer is-'to Lancaster';
    And I am come to seek that name in England;
    And I must find that title in your tongue
    Before I make reply to aught you say.
  BERKELEY. Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning
    To raze one title of your honour out.
    To you, my lord, I come-what lord you will-
    From the most gracious regent of this land,
    The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on
    To take advantage of the absent time,
    And fright our native peace with self-borne arms.

                 Enter YORK, attended

  BOLINGBROKE. I shall not need transport my words by you;
    Here comes his Grace in person. My noble uncle!
                                                     [Kneels]
  YORK. Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,  
    Whose duty is deceivable and false.
  BOLINGBROKE. My gracious uncle!-
  YORK. Tut, tut!
    Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle.
    I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace'
    In an ungracious mouth is but profane.
    Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs
    Dar'd once to touch a dust of England's ground?
    But then more 'why?'-why have they dar'd to march
    So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
    Frighting her pale-fac'd villages with war
    And ostentation of despised arms?
    Com'st thou because the anointed King is hence?
    Why, foolish boy, the King is left behind,
    And in my loyal bosom lies his power.
    Were I but now lord of such hot youth
    As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
    Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
    From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
    O, then how quickly should this arm of mine,  
    Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise the
    And minister correction to thy fault!
  BOLINGBROKE My gracious uncle, let me know my fault;
    On what condition stands it and wherein?
  YORK. Even in condition of the worst degree-
    In gross rebellion and detested treason.
    Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come
    Before the expiration of thy time,
    In braving arms against thy sovereign.
  BOLINGBROKE. As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford;
    But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
    And, noble uncle, I beseech your Grace
    Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye.
    You are my father, for methinks in you
    I see old Gaunt alive. O, then, my father,
    Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd
    A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties
    Pluck'd from my arms perforce, and given away
    To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?
    If that my cousin king be King in England,  
    It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.
    You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;
    Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
    He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father
    To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
    I am denied to sue my livery here,
    And yet my letters patents give me leave.
    My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold;
    And these and all are all amiss employ'd.
    What would you have me do? I am a subject,
    And I challenge law-attorneys are denied me;
    And therefore personally I lay my claim
    To my inheritance of free descent.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. The noble Duke hath been too much abused.
  ROSS. It stands your Grace upon to do him right.
  WILLOUGHBY. Base men by his endowments are made great.
  YORK. My lords of England, let me tell you this:
    I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs,
    And labour'd all I could to do him right;
    But in this kind to come, in braving arms,  
    Be his own carver and cut out his way,
    To find out right with wrong-it may not be;
    And you that do abet him in this kind
    Cherish rebellion, and are rebels all.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. The noble Duke hath sworn his coming is
    But for his own; and for the right of that
    We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;
    And let him never see joy that breaks that oath!
  YORK. Well, well, I see the issue of these arms.
    I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
    Because my power is weak and all ill left;
    But if I could, by Him that gave me life,
    I would attach you all and make you stoop
    Unto the sovereign mercy of the King;
    But since I cannot, be it known unto you
    I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well;
    Unless you please to enter in the castle,
    And there repose you for this night.
  BOLINGBROKE. An offer, uncle, that we will accept.
    But we must win your Grace to go with us  
    To Bristow Castle, which they say is held
    By Bushy, Bagot, and their complices,
    The caterpillars of the commonwealth,
    Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
  YORK. It may be I will go with you; but yet I'll pause,
    For I am loath to break our country's laws.
    Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are.
    Things past redress are now with me past care.        Exeunt




SCENE 4.
A camp in Wales

Enter EARL OF SALISBURY and a WELSH CAPTAIN

  CAPTAIN. My Lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days
    And hardly kept our countrymen together,
    And yet we hear no tidings from the King;
    Therefore we will disperse ourselves. Farewell.
  SALISBURY. Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman;
    The King reposeth all his confidence in thee.
  CAPTAIN. 'Tis thought the King is dead; we will not stay.
    The bay trees in our country are all wither'd,
    And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;
    The pale-fac'd moon looks bloody on the earth,
    And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change;
    Rich men look sad, and ruffians dance and leap-
    The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
    The other to enjoy by rage and war.
    These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
    Farewell. Our countrymen are gone and fled,
    As well assur'd Richard their King is dead.             Exit  
  SALISBURY. Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind,
    I see thy glory like a shooting star
    Fall to the base earth from the firmament!
    The sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
    Witnessing storms to come, woe, and unrest;
    Thy friends are fled, to wait upon thy foes;
    And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.               Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
BOLINGBROKE'S camp at Bristol

Enter BOLINGBROKE, YORK, NORTHUMBERLAND, PERCY, ROSS, WILLOUGHBY,
BUSHY and GREEN, prisoners

  BOLINGBROKE. Bring forth these men.
    Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls-
    Since presently your souls must part your bodies-
    With too much urging your pernicious lives,
    For 'twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood
    From off my hands, here in the view of men
    I will unfold some causes of your deaths:
    You have misled a prince, a royal king,
    A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
    By you unhappied and disfigured clean;
    You have in manner with your sinful hours
    Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him;
    Broke the possession of a royal bed,
    And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
    With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs;
    Myself-a prince by fortune of my birth,  
    Near to the King in blood, and near in love
    Till you did make him misinterpret me-
    Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries
    And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds,
    Eating the bitter bread of banishment,
    Whilst you have fed upon my signories,
    Dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods,
    From my own windows torn my household coat,
    Raz'd out my imprese, leaving me no sign
    Save men's opinions and my living blood
    To show the world I am a gentleman.
    This and much more, much more than twice all this,
    Condemns you to the death. See them delivered over
    To execution and the hand of death.
  BUSHY. More welcome is the stroke of death to me
    Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.
  GREEN. My comfort is that heaven will take our souls,
    And plague injustice with the pains of hell.
  BOLINGBROKE. My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
           Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND, and others, with the prisoners  
    Uncle, you say the Queen is at your house;
    For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated.
    Tell her I send to her my kind commends;
    Take special care my greetings be delivered.
  YORK. A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd
    With letters of your love to her at large.
  BOLINGBROKE. Thanks, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away,
    To fight with Glendower and his complices.
    Awhile to work, and after holiday.                    Exeunt




SCENE 2.
The coast of Wales. A castle in view

Drums. Flourish and colours. Enter the KING, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE,
AUMERLE, and soldiers

  KING RICHARD. Barkloughly Castle can they this at hand?
  AUMERLE. Yea, my lord. How brooks your Grace the air
    After your late tossing on the breaking seas?
  KING RICHARD. Needs must I like it well. I weep for joy
    To stand upon my kingdom once again.
    Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
    Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs.
    As a long-parted mother with her child
    Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,
    So weeping-smiling greet I thee, my earth,
    And do thee favours with my royal hands.
    Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
    Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense;
    But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,
    And heavy-gaited toads, lie in their way,
    Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet  
    Which with usurping steps do trample thee;
    Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;
    And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
    Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder,
    Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
    Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
    Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords.
    This earth shall have a feeling, and these stones
    Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
    Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
  CARLISLE. Fear not, my lord; that Power that made you king
    Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
    The means that heaven yields must be embrac'd
    And not neglected; else, if heaven would,
    And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,
    The proffered means of succour and redress.
  AUMERLE. He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;
    Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
    Grows strong and great in substance and in power.
  KING RICHARD. Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not  
    That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,
    Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,
    Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen
    In murders and in outrage boldly here;
    But when from under this terrestrial ball
    He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
    And darts his light through every guilty hole,
    Then murders, treasons, and detested sins,
    The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,
    Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?
    So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,
    Who all this while hath revell'd in the night,
    Whilst we were wand'ring with the Antipodes,
    Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,
    His treasons will sit blushing in his face,
    Not able to endure the sight of day,
    But self-affrighted tremble at his sin.
    Not all the water in the rough rude sea
    Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;
    The breath of worldly men cannot depose  
    The deputy elected by the Lord.
    For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd
    To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,
    God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay
    A glorious angel. Then, if angels fight,
    Weak men must fall; for heaven still guards the right.

                 Enter SALISBURY

    Welcome, my lord. How far off lies your power?
  SALISBURY. Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
    Than this weak arm. Discomfort guides my tongue,
    And bids me speak of nothing but despair.
    One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,
    Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth.
    O, call back yesterday, bid time return,
    And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!
    To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,
    O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune, and thy state;
    For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead,  
    Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispers'd, and fled.
  AUMERLE. Comfort, my liege, why looks your Grace so pale?
  KING RICHARD. But now the blood of twenty thousand men
    Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;
    And, till so much blood thither come again,
    Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
    All souls that will be safe, fly from my side;
    For time hath set a blot upon my pride.
  AUMERLE. Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.
  KING RICHARD. I had forgot myself; am I not King?
    Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.
    Is not the King's name twenty thousand names?
    Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes
    At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
    Ye favourites of a king; are we not high?
    High be our thoughts. I know my uncle York
    Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?

                   Enter SCROOP
  
  SCROOP. More health and happiness betide my liege
    Than can my care-tun'd tongue deliver him.
  KING RICHARD. Mine ear is open and my heart prepar'd.
    The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
    Say, is my kingdom lost? Why, 'twas my care,
    And what loss is it to be rid of care?
    Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
    Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,
    We'll serve him too, and be his fellow so.
    Revolt our subjects? That we cannot mend;
    They break their faith to God as well as us.
    Cry woe, destruction, ruin, and decay-
    The worst is death, and death will have his day.
  SCROOP. Glad am I that your Highness is so arm'd
    To bear the tidings of calamity.
    Like an unseasonable stormy day
    Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
    As if the world were all dissolv'd to tears,
    So high above his limits swells the rage
    Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land  
    With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
    White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps
    Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices,
    Strive to speak big, and clap their female joints
    In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown;
    Thy very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
    Of double-fatal yew against thy state;
    Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills
    Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,
    And all goes worse than I have power to tell.
  KING RICHARD. Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so in.
    Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? Where is Bagot?
    What is become of Bushy? Where is Green?
    That they have let the dangerous enemy
    Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?
    If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it.
    I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.
  SCROOP. Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
  KING RICHARD. O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!
    Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!  
    Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!
    Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!
    Would they make peace? Terrible hell make war
    Upon their spotted souls for this offence!
  SCROOP. Sweet love, I see, changing his property,
    Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate.
    Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made
    With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse
    Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
    And lie full low, grav'd in the hollow ground.
  AUMERLE. Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
  SCROOP. Ay, all of them at Bristow lost their heads.
  AUMERLE. Where is the Duke my father with his power?
  KING RICHARD. No matter where-of comfort no man speak.
    Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;
    Make dust our paper, and with rainy eyes
    Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth.
    Let's choose executors and talk of wills;
    And yet not so-for what can we bequeath
    Save our deposed bodies to the ground?  
    Our lands, our lives, and an, are Bolingbroke's.
    And nothing can we can our own but death
    And that small model of the barren earth
    Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
    For God's sake let us sit upon the ground
    And tell sad stories of the death of kings:
    How some have been depos'd, some slain in war,
    Some haunted by the ghosts they have depos'd,
    Some poison'd by their wives, some sleeping kill'd,
    All murder'd-for within the hollow crown
    That rounds the mortal temples of a king
    Keeps Death his court; and there the antic sits,
    Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp;
    Allowing him a breath, a little scene,
    To monarchize, be fear'd, and kill with looks;
    Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
    As if this flesh which walls about our life
    Were brass impregnable; and, humour'd thus,
    Comes at the last, and with a little pin
    Bores through his castle wall, and farewell, king!  
    Cover your heads, and mock not flesh and blood
    With solemn reverence; throw away respect,
    Tradition, form, and ceremonious duty;
    For you have but mistook me all this while.
    I live with bread like you, feel want,
    Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,
    How can you say to me I am a king?
  CARLISLE. My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
    But presently prevent the ways to wail.
    To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
    Gives, in your weakness, strength unto your foe,
    And so your follies fight against yourself.
    Fear and be slain-no worse can come to fight;
    And fight and die is death destroying death,
    Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.
  AUMERLE. My father hath a power; inquire of him,
    And learn to make a body of a limb.
  KING RICHARD. Thou chid'st me well. Proud Bolingbroke, I come
    To change blows with thee for our day of doom.
    This ague fit of fear is over-blown;  
    An easy task it is to win our own.
    Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
    Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
  SCROOP. Men judge by the complexion of the sky
    The state in inclination of the day;
    So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
    My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
    I play the torturer, by small and small
    To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
    Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke;
    And all your northern castles yielded up,
    And all your southern gentlemen in arms
    Upon his party.
  KING RICHARD. Thou hast said enough.
      [To AUMERLE] Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth
    Of that sweet way I was in to despair!
    What say you now? What comfort have we now?
    By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly
    That bids me be of comfort any more.
    Go to Flint Castle; there I'll pine away;  
    A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.
    That power I have, discharge; and let them go
    To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
    For I have none. Let no man speak again
    To alter this, for counsel is but vain.
  AUMERLE. My liege, one word.
  KING RICHARD. He does me double wrong
    That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
    Discharge my followers; let them hence away,
    From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.       Exeunt




SCENE 3.
Wales. Before Flint Castle

Enter, with drum and colours, BOLINGBROKE, YORK, NORTHUMBERLAND,
and forces

  BOLINGBROKE. So that by this intelligence we learn
    The Welshmen are dispers'd; and Salisbury
    Is gone to meet the King, who lately landed
    With some few private friends upon this coast.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. The news is very fair and good, my lord.
    Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
  YORK. It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
    To say 'King Richard.' Alack the heavy day
    When such a sacred king should hide his head!
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Your Grace mistakes; only to be brief,
    Left I his title out.
  YORK. The time hath been,
    Would you have been so brief with him, he would
    Have been so brief with you to shorten you,
    For taking so the head, your whole head's length.
  BOLINGBROKE. Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.  
  YORK. Take not, good cousin, further than you should,
    Lest you mistake. The heavens are over our heads.
  BOLINGBROKE. I know it, uncle; and oppose not myself
    Against their will. But who comes here?

                    Enter PERCY

    Welcome, Harry. What, will not this castle yield?
  PIERCY. The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,
    Against thy entrance.
  BOLINGBROKE. Royally!
    Why, it contains no king?
  PERCY. Yes, my good lord,
    It doth contain a king; King Richard lies
    Within the limits of yon lime and stone;
    And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
    Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
    Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.
  BOLINGBROKE. [To NORTHUMBERLAND] Noble lord,  
    Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;
    Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
    Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver:
    Henry Bolingbroke
    On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand,
    And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
    To his most royal person; hither come
    Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
    Provided that my banishment repeal'd
    And lands restor'd again be freely granted;
    If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
    And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
    Rain'd from the wounds of slaughtered Englishmen;
    The which how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
    It is such crimson tempest should bedrench
    The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
    My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
    Go, signify as much, while here we march
    Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
           [NORTHUMBERLAND advances to the Castle, with a trumpet]  
    Let's march without the noise of threat'ning drum,
    That from this castle's tottered battlements
    Our fair appointments may be well perus'd.
    Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
    With no less terror than the elements
    Of fire and water, when their thund'ring shock
    At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
    Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water;
    The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
    My waters-on the earth, and not on him.
    March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.

      Parle without, and answer within; then a flourish.
      Enter on the walls, the KING, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE,
      AUMERLE, SCROOP, and SALISBURY

    See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,
    As doth the blushing discontented sun
    From out the fiery portal of the east,
    When he perceives the envious clouds are bent  
    To dim his glory and to stain the track
    Of his bright passage to the occident.
  YORK. Yet he looks like a king. Behold, his eye,
    As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
    Controlling majesty. Alack, alack, for woe,
    That any harm should stain so fair a show!
  KING RICHARD. [To NORTHUMBERLAND] We are amaz'd; and thus long
      have we stood
    To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
    Because we thought ourself thy lawful King;
    And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
    To pay their awful duty to our presence?
    If we be not, show us the hand of God
    That hath dismiss'd us from our stewardship;
    For well we know no hand of blood and bone
    Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
    Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
    And though you think that all, as you have done,
    Have torn their souls by turning them from us,
    And we are barren and bereft of friends,  
    Yet know-my master, God omnipotent,
    Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf
    Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike
    Your children yet unborn and unbegot,
    That lift your vassal hands against my head
    And threat the glory of my precious crown.
    Tell Bolingbroke, for yon methinks he stands,
    That every stride he makes upon my land
    Is dangerous treason; he is come to open
    The purple testament of bleeding war;
    But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
    Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons
    Shall ill become the flower of England's face,
    Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
    To scarlet indignation, and bedew
    Her pastures' grass with faithful English blood.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. The King of Heaven forbid our lord the King
    Should so with civil and uncivil arms
    Be rush'd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin,
    Harry Bolingbroke, doth humbly kiss thy hand;  
    And by the honourable tomb he swears
    That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,
    And by the royalties of both your bloods,
    Currents that spring from one most gracious head,
    And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
    And by the worth and honour of himself,
    Comprising all that may be sworn or said,
    His coming hither hath no further scope
    Than for his lineal royalties, and to beg
    Enfranchisement immediate on his knees;
    Which on thy royal party granted once,
    His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
    His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
    To faithful service of your Majesty.
    This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;
    And as I am a gentleman I credit him.
  KING RICHARD. Northumberland, say thus the King returns:
    His noble cousin is right welcome hither;
    And all the number of his fair demands
    Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction.  
    With all the gracious utterance thou hast
    Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
    [To AUMERLE] We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,
    To look so poorly and to speak so fair?
    Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
    Defiance to the traitor, and so die?
  AUMERLE. No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words
    Till time lend friends, and friends their helpful swords.
  KING RICHARD. O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine
    That laid the sentence of dread banishment
    On yon proud man should take it off again
    With words of sooth! O that I were as great
    As is my grief, or lesser than my name!
    Or that I could forget what I have been!
    Or not remember what I must be now!
    Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat,
    Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
  AUMERLE. Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
  KING RICHARD. What must the King do now? Must he submit?
    The King shall do it. Must he be depos'd?  
    The King shall be contented. Must he lose
    The name of king? A God's name, let it go.
    I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,
    My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
    My gay apparel for an almsman's gown,
    My figur'd goblets for a dish of wood,
    My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff,
    My subjects for a pair of carved saints,
    And my large kingdom for a little grave,
    A little little grave, an obscure grave-
    Or I'll be buried in the king's high way,
    Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet
    May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;
    For on my heart they tread now whilst I live,
    And buried once, why not upon my head?
    Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin!
    We'll make foul weather with despised tears;
    Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn
    And make a dearth in this revolting land.
    Or shall we play the wantons with our woes  
    And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
    As thus: to drop them still upon one place
    Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
    Within the earth; and, therein laid-there lies
    Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.
    Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see
    I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
    Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,
    What says King Bolingbroke? Will his Majesty
    Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
    You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. My lord, in the base court he doth attend
    To speak with you; may it please you to come down?
  KING RICHARD. Down, down I come, like glist'ring Phaethon,
    Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
    In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,
    To come at traitors' calls, and do them grace.
    In the base court? Come down? Down, court! down, king!
    For night-owls shriek where mounting larks should sing.
                                               Exeunt from above  
  BOLINGBROKE. What says his Majesty?
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Sorrow and grief of heart
    Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man;
    Yet he is come.

          Enter the KING, and his attendants, below

  BOLINGBROKE. Stand all apart,
    And show fair duty to his Majesty.   [He kneels down]
    My gracious lord-
  KING RICHARD. Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
    To make the base earth proud with kissing it.
    Me rather had my heart might feel your love
    Than my unpleas'd eye see your courtesy.
    Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,
    [Touching his own head] Thus high at least, although your
      knee be low.
  BOLINGBROKE. My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.
  KING RICHARD. Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
  BOLINGBROKE. So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,  
    As my true service shall deserve your love.
  KING RICHARD. Well you deserve. They well deserve to have
    That know the strong'st and surest way to get.
    Uncle, give me your hands; nay, dry your eyes:
    Tears show their love, but want their remedies.
    Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
    Though you are old enough to be my heir.
    What you will have, I'll give, and willing too;
    For do we must what force will have us do.
    Set on towards London. Cousin, is it so?
  BOLINGBROKE. Yea, my good lord.
  KING RICHARD. Then I must not say no.         Flourish. Exeunt




SCENE 4.
The DUKE OF YORK's garden

Enter the QUEEN and two LADIES

  QUEEN. What sport shall we devise here in this garden
    To drive away the heavy thought of care?
  LADY. Madam, we'll play at bowls.
  QUEEN. 'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs
    And that my fortune runs against the bias.
  LADY. Madam, we'll dance.
  QUEEN. My legs can keep no measure in delight,
    When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief;
    Therefore no dancing, girl; some other sport.
  LADY. Madam, we'll tell tales.
  QUEEN. Of sorrow or of joy?
  LADY. Of either, madam.
  QUEEN. Of neither, girl;
    For if of joy, being altogether wanting,
    It doth remember me the more of sorrow;
    Or if of grief, being altogether had,
    It adds more sorrow to my want of joy;  
    For what I have I need not to repeat,
    And what I want it boots not to complain.
  LADY. Madam, I'll sing.
  QUEEN. 'Tis well' that thou hast cause;
    But thou shouldst please me better wouldst thou weep.
  LADY. I could weep, madam, would it do you good.
  QUEEN. And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
    And never borrow any tear of thee.

           Enter a GARDENER and two SERVANTS

    But stay, here come the gardeners.
    Let's step into the shadow of these trees.
    My wretchedness unto a row of pins,
    They will talk of state, for every one doth so
    Against a change: woe is forerun with woe.
                                       [QUEEN and LADIES retire]
  GARDENER. Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
    Which, like unruly children, make their sire
    Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight;  
    Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
    Go thou, and Eke an executioner
    Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays
    That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
    All must be even in our government.
    You thus employ'd, I will go root away
    The noisome weeds which without profit suck
    The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.
  SERVANT. Why should we, in the compass of a pale,
    Keep law and form and due proportion,
    Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,
    When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
    Is full of weeds; her fairest flowers chok'd up,
    Her fruit trees all unprun'd, her hedges ruin'd,
    Her knots disordered, and her wholesome herbs
    Swarming with caterpillars?
  GARDENER. Hold thy peace.
    He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring
    Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf;
    The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,  
    That seem'd in eating him to hold him up,
    Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke-
    I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.
  SERVANT. What, are they dead?
  GARDENER. They are; and Bolingbroke
    Hath seiz'd the wasteful King. O, what pity is it
    That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land
    As we this garden! We at time of year
    Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit trees,
    Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,
    With too much riches it confound itself;
    Had he done so to great and growing men,
    They might have Ev'd to bear, and he to taste
    Their fruits of duty. Superfluous branches
    We lop away, that bearing boughs may live;
    Had he done so, himself had home the crown,
    Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.
  SERVANT. What, think you the King shall be deposed?
  GARDENER. Depress'd he is already, and depos'd
    'Tis doubt he will be. Letters came last night  
    To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's
    That tell black tidings.
  QUEEN. O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
                                                [Coming forward]
    Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,
    How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
    What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested the
    To make a second fall of cursed man?
    Why dost thou say King Richard is depos'd?
    Dar'st thou, thou little better thing than earth,
    Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how,
    Cam'st thou by this ill tidings? Speak, thou wretch.
  GARDENER. Pardon me, madam; little joy have
    To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.
    King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
    Of Bolingbroke. Their fortunes both are weigh'd.
    In your lord's scale is nothing but himself,
    And some few vanities that make him light;
    But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
    Besides himself, are all the English peers,  
    And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
    Post you to London, and you will find it so;
    I speak no more than every one doth know.
  QUEEN. Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
    Doth not thy embassage belong to me,
    And am I last that knows it? O, thou thinkest
    To serve me last, that I may longest keep
    Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go
    To meet at London London's King in woe.
    What, was I born to this, that my sad look
    Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
    Gard'ner, for telling me these news of woe,
    Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow!
                                         Exeunt QUEEN and LADIES
  GARDENER. Poor Queen, so that thy state might be no worse,
    I would my skill were subject to thy curse.
    Here did she fall a tear; here in this place
    I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace.
    Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
    In the remembrance of a weeping queen.                Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE 1.
Westminster Hall

Enter, as to the Parliament, BOLINGBROKE, AUMERLE, NORTHUMBERLAND, PERCY,
FITZWATER, SURREY, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, the ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER,
and others; HERALD, OFFICERS, and BAGOT

  BOLINGBROKE. Call forth Bagot.
    Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind-
    What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death;
    Who wrought it with the King, and who perform'd
    The bloody office of his timeless end.
  BAGOT. Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.
  BOLINGBROKE. Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
  BAGOT. My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
    Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.
    In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted
    I heard you say 'Is not my arm of length,
    That reacheth from the restful English Court
    As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?'
    Amongst much other talk that very time  
    I heard you say that you had rather refuse
    The offer of an hundred thousand crowns
    Than Bolingbroke's return to England;
    Adding withal, how blest this land would be
    In this your cousin's death.
  AUMERLE. Princes, and noble lords,
    What answer shall I make to this base man?
    Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars
    On equal terms to give him chastisement?
    Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
    With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
    There is my gage, the manual seal of death
    That marks thee out for hell. I say thou liest,
    And will maintain what thou hast said is false
    In thy heart-blood, through being all too base
    To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
  BOLINGBROKE. Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.
  AUMERLE. Excepting one, I would he were the best
    In all this presence that hath mov'd me so.
  FITZWATER. If that thy valour stand on sympathy,  
    There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine.
    By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st,
    I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spak'st it,
    That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.
    If thou deniest it twenty times, thou liest;
    And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
    Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.
  AUMERLE. Thou dar'st not, coward, live to see that day.
  FITZWATER. Now, by my soul, I would it were this hour.
  AUMERLE. Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.
  PERCY. Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true
    In this appeal as thou art an unjust;
    And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
    To prove it on thee to the extremest point
    Of mortal breathing. Seize it, if thou dar'st.
  AUMERLE. An if I do not, may my hands rot of
    And never brandish more revengeful steel
    Over the glittering helmet of my foe!
  ANOTHER LORD. I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;
    And spur thee on with fun as many lies  
    As may be halloa'd in thy treacherous ear
    From sun to sun. There is my honour's pawn;
    Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
  AUMERLE. Who sets me else? By heaven, I'll throw at all!
    I have a thousand spirits in one breast
    To answer twenty thousand such as you.
  SURREY. My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
    The very time Aumerle and you did talk.
  FITZWATER. 'Tis very true; you were in presence then,
    And you can witness with me this is true.
  SURREY. As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
  FITZWATER. Surrey, thou liest.
  SURREY. Dishonourable boy!
    That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword
    That it shall render vengeance and revenge
    Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do he
    In earth as quiet as thy father's skull.
    In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;
    Engage it to the trial, if thou dar'st.
  FITZWATER. How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!  
    If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
    I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,
    And spit upon him whilst I say he lies,
    And lies, and lies. There is my bond of faith,
    To tie thee to my strong correction.
    As I intend to thrive in this new world,
    Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal.
    Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say
    That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men
    To execute the noble Duke at Calais.
  AUMERLE. Some honest Christian trust me with a gage
    That Norfolk lies. Here do I throw down this,
    If he may be repeal'd to try his honour.
  BOLINGBROKE. These differences shall all rest under gage
    Till Norfolk be repeal'd-repeal'd he shall be
    And, though mine enemy, restor'd again
    To all his lands and signories. When he is return'd,
    Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.
  CARLISLE. That honourable day shall never be seen.
    Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought  
    For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
    Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
    Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens;
    And, toil'd with works of war, retir'd himself
    To Italy; and there, at Venice, gave
    His body to that pleasant country's earth,
    And his pure soul unto his captain, Christ,
    Under whose colours he had fought so long.
  BOLINGBROKE. Why, Bishop, is Norfolk dead?
  CARLISLE. As surely as I live, my lord.
  BOLINGBROKE. Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
    Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,
    Your differences shall all rest under gage
    Till we assign you to your days of trial

                 Enter YORK, attended

  YORK. Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to the
    From plume-pluck'd Richard, who with willing soul
    Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields  
    To the possession of thy royal hand.
    Ascend his throne, descending now from him-
    And long live Henry, fourth of that name!
  BOLINGBROKE. In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.
  CARLISLE. Marry, God forbid!
    Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
    Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
    Would God that any in this noble presence
    Were enough noble to be upright judge
    Of noble Richard! Then true noblesse would
    Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
    What subject can give sentence on his king?
    And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?
    Thieves are not judg'd but they are by to hear,
    Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
    And shall the figure of God's majesty,
    His captain, steward, deputy elect,
    Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
    Be judg'd by subject and inferior breath,
    And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God,  
    That in a Christian climate souls refin'd
    Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
    I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
    Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king.
    My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
    Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king;
    And if you crown him, let me prophesy-
    The blood of English shall manure the ground,
    And future ages groan for this foul act;
    Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
    And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
    Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;
    Disorder, horror, fear, and mutiny,
    Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd
    The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.
    O, if you raise this house against this house,
    It will the woefullest division prove
    That ever fell upon this cursed earth.
    Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
    Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe.  
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,
    Of capital treason we arrest you here.
    My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge
    To keep him safely till his day of trial.
    May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit?
  BOLINGBROKE. Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
    He may surrender; so we shall proceed
    Without suspicion.
  YORK. I will be his conduct.                              Exit
  BOLINGBROKE. Lords, you that here are under our arrest,
    Procure your sureties for your days of answer.
    Little are we beholding to your love,
    And little look'd for at your helping hands.

      Re-enter YORK, with KING RICHARD, and OFFICERS
                bearing the regalia

  KING RICHARD. Alack, why am I sent for to a king,
    Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
    Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet have learn'd  
    To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my knee.
    Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me
    To this submission. Yet I well remember
    The favours of these men. Were they not mine?
    Did they not sometime cry 'All hail!' to me?
    So Judas did to Christ; but he, in twelve,
    Found truth in all but one; I, in twelve thousand, none.
    God save the King! Will no man say amen?
    Am I both priest and clerk? Well then, amen.
    God save the King! although I be not he;
    And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
    To do what service am I sent for hither?
  YORK. To do that office of thine own good will
    Which tired majesty did make thee offer-
    The resignation of thy state and crown
    To Henry Bolingbroke.
  KING RICHARD. Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown.
    Here, cousin,
    On this side my hand, and on that side thine.
    Now is this golden crown like a deep well  
    That owes two buckets, filling one another;
    The emptier ever dancing in the air,
    The other down, unseen, and full of water.
    That bucket down and fun of tears am I,
    Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
  BOLINGBROKE. I thought you had been willing to resign.
  KING RICHARD. My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine.
    You may my glories and my state depose,
    But not my griefs; still am I king of those.
  BOLINGBROKE. Part of your cares you give me with your crown.
  KING RICHARD. Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
    My care is loss of care, by old care done;
    Your care is gain of care, by new care won.
    The cares I give I have, though given away;
    They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
  BOLINGBROKE. Are you contented to resign the crown?
  KING RICHARD. Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;
    Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.
    Now mark me how I will undo myself:
    I give this heavy weight from off my head,  
    And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,
    The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;
    With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
    With mine own hands I give away my crown,
    With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
    With mine own breath release all duteous oaths;
    All pomp and majesty I do forswear;
    My manors, rents, revenues, I forgo;
    My acts, decrees, and statutes, I deny.
    God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!
    God keep all vows unbroke are made to thee!
    Make me, that nothing have, with nothing griev'd,
    And thou with all pleas'd, that hast an achiev'd.
    Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,
    And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit.
    God save King Henry, unking'd Richard says,
    And send him many years of sunshine days!
    What more remains?
  NORTHUMBERLAND. No more; but that you read
    These accusations, and these grievous crimes  
    Committed by your person and your followers
    Against the state and profit of this land;
    That, by confessing them, the souls of men
    May deem that you are worthily depos'd.
  KING RICHARD. Must I do so? And must I ravel out
    My weav'd-up follies? Gentle Northumberland,
    If thy offences were upon record,
    Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
    To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
    There shouldst thou find one heinous article,
    Containing the deposing of a king
    And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
    Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven.
    Nay, all of you that stand and look upon me
    Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
    Though some of you, with Pilate, wash your hands,
    Showing an outward pity-yet you Pilates
    Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross,
    And water cannot wash away your sin.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. My lord, dispatch; read o'er these  
    articles.
  KING RICHARD. Mine eyes are full of tears; I cannot see.
    And yet salt water blinds them not so much
    But they can see a sort of traitors here.
    Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
    I find myself a traitor with the rest;
    For I have given here my soul's consent
    T'undeck the pompous body of a king;
    Made glory base, and sovereignty a slave,
    Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. My lord-
  KING RICHARD. No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
    Nor no man's lord; I have no name, no tide-
    No, not that name was given me at the font-
    But 'tis usurp'd. Alack the heavy day,
    That I have worn so many winters out,
    And know not now what name to call myself!
    O that I were a mockery king of snow,
    Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke
    To melt myself away in water drops!  
    Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
    An if my word be sterling yet in England,
    Let it command a mirror hither straight,
    That it may show me what a face I have
    Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
  BOLINGBROKE. Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.
                                               Exit an attendant
  NORTHUMBERLAND. Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
  KING RICHARD. Fiend, thou torments me ere I come to hell.
  BOLINGBROKE. Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. The Commons will not, then, be satisfied.
  KING RICHARD. They shall be satisfied. I'll read enough,
    When I do see the very book indeed
    Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.

                Re-enter attendant with glass

    Give me that glass, and therein will I read.
    No deeper wrinkles yet? Hath sorrow struck
    So many blows upon this face of mine  
    And made no deeper wounds? O flatt'ring glass,
    Like to my followers in prosperity,
    Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face
    That every day under his household roof
    Did keep ten thousand men? Was this the face
    That like the sun did make beholders wink?
    Is this the face which fac'd so many follies
    That was at last out-fac'd by Bolingbroke?
    A brittle glory shineth in this face;
    As brittle as the glory is the face;
                        [Dashes the glass against the ground]
    For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.
    Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport-
    How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.
  BOLINGBROKE. The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd
    The shadow of your face.
  KING RICHARD. Say that again.
    The shadow of my sorrow? Ha! let's see.
    'Tis very true: my grief lies all within;
    And these external manner of laments  
    Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
    That swells with silence in the tortur'd soul.
    There lies the substance; and I thank thee, king,
    For thy great bounty, that not only giv'st
    Me cause to wail, but teachest me the way
    How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon,
    And then be gone and trouble you no more.
    Shall I obtain it?
  BOLINGBROKE. Name it, fair cousin.
  KING RICHARD. Fair cousin! I am greater than a king;
    For when I was a king, my flatterers
    Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
    I have a king here to my flatterer.
    Being so great, I have no need to beg.
  BOLINGBROKE. Yet ask.
  KING RICHARD. And shall I have?
  BOLINGBROKE. You shall.
  KING RICHARD. Then give me leave to go.
  BOLINGBROKE. Whither?
  KING RICHARD. Whither you will, so I were from your sights.  
  BOLINGBROKE. Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.
  KING RICHARD. O, good! Convey! Conveyers are you all,
    That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
                     Exeunt KING RICHARD, some Lords and a Guard
  BOLINGBROKE. On Wednesday next we solemnly set down
    Our coronation. Lords, prepare yourselves.
                    Exeunt all but the ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER, the
                                 BISHOP OF CARLISLE, and AUMERLE
  ABBOT. A woeful pageant have we here beheld.
  CARLISLE. The woe's to come; the children yet unborn
    Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
  AUMERLE. You holy clergymen, is there no plot
    To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
  ABBOT. My lord,
    Before I freely speak my mind herein,
    You shall not only take the sacrament
    To bury mine intents, but also to effect
    Whatever I shall happen to devise.
    I see your brows are full of discontent,
    Your hearts of sorrow, and your eyes of tears.  
    Come home with me to supper; I will lay
    A plot shall show us all a merry day.                 Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE 1.
London. A street leading to the Tower

Enter the QUEEN, with her attendants

  QUEEN. This way the King will come; this is the way
    To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower,
    To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
    Is doom'd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke.
    Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
    Have any resting for her true King's queen.

            Enter KING RICHARD and Guard

    But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
    My fair rose wither. Yet look up, behold,
    That you in pity may dissolve to dew,
    And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.
    Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand;
    Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,
    And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn,
    Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodg'd in thee,  
    When triumph is become an alehouse guest?
  KING RICHARD. Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,
    To make my end too sudden. Learn, good soul,
    To think our former state a happy dream;
    From which awak'd, the truth of what we are
    Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
    To grim Necessity; and he and
    Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France,
    And cloister thee in some religious house.
    Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
    Which our profane hours here have thrown down.
  QUEEN. What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
    Transform'd and weak'ned? Hath Bolingbroke depos'd
    Thine intellect? Hath he been in thy heart?
    The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw
    And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
    To be o'erpow'r'd; and wilt thou, pupil-like,
    Take the correction mildly, kiss the rod,
    And fawn on rage with base humility,
    Which art a lion and the king of beasts?  
  KING RICHARD. A king of beasts, indeed! If aught but beasts,
    I had been still a happy king of men.
    Good sometimes queen, prepare thee hence for France.
    Think I am dead, and that even here thou takest,
    As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.
    In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
    With good old folks, and let them tell thee tales
    Of woeful ages long ago betid;
    And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs
    Tell thou the lamentable tale of me,
    And send the hearers weeping to their beds;
    For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
    The heavy accent of thy moving tongue,
    And in compassion weep the fire out;
    And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
    For the deposing of a rightful king.

             Enter NORTHUMBERLAND attended

  NORTHUMBERLAND. My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is chang'd;  
    You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
    And, madam, there is order ta'en for you:
    With all swift speed you must away to France.
  KING RICHARD. Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
    The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
    The time shall not be many hours of age
    More than it is, ere foul sin gathering head
    Shall break into corruption. Thou shalt think
    Though he divide the realm and give thee half
    It is too little, helping him to all;
    And he shall think that thou, which knowest the way
    To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
    Being ne'er so little urg'd, another way
    To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
    The love of wicked men converts to fear;
    That fear to hate; and hate turns one or both
    To worthy danger and deserved death.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
    Take leave, and part; for you must part forthwith.
  KING RICHARD. Doubly divorc'd! Bad men, you violate  
    A twofold marriage-'twixt my crown and me,
    And then betwixt me and my married wife.
    Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me;
    And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.
    Part us, Northumberland; I towards the north,
    Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
    My wife to France, from whence set forth in pomp,
    She came adorned hither like sweet May,
    Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.
  QUEEN. And must we be divided? Must we part?
  KING RICHARD. Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
  QUEEN. Banish us both, and send the King with me.
  NORTHUMBERLAND. That were some love, but little policy.
  QUEEN. Then whither he goes thither let me go.
  KING RICHARD. So two, together weeping, make one woe.
    Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
    Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
    Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.
  QUEEN. So longest way shall have the longest moans.
  KING RICHARD. Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,  
    And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
    Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,
    Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief.
    One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;
    Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.
  QUEEN. Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part
    To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
    So, now I have mine own again, be gone.
    That I may strive to kill it with a groan.
  KING RICHARD. We make woe wanton with this fond delay.
    Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.            Exeunt




SCENE 2.
The DUKE OF YORK's palace

Enter the DUKE OF YORK and the DUCHESS

  DUCHESS. My Lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
    When weeping made you break the story off,
    Of our two cousins' coming into London.
  YORK. Where did I leave?
  DUCHESS. At that sad stop, my lord,
    Where rude misgoverned hands from windows' tops
    Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.
  YORK. Then, as I said, the Duke, great Bolingbroke,
    Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed
    Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,
    With slow but stately pace kept on his course,
    Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee, Bolingbroke!'
    You would have thought the very windows spake,
    So many greedy looks of young and old
    Through casements darted their desiring eyes
    Upon his visage; and that all the walls
    With painted imagery had said at once  
    'Jesu preserve thee! Welcome, Bolingbroke!'
    Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
    Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,
    Bespake them thus, 'I thank you, countrymen.'
    And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.
  DUCHESS. Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?
  YORK. As in a theatre the eyes of men
    After a well-grac'd actor leaves the stage
    Are idly bent on him that enters next,
    Thinking his prattle to be tedious;
    Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
    Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried 'God save him!'
    No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home;
    But dust was thrown upon his sacred head;
    Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
    His face still combating with tears and smiles,
    The badges of his grief and patience,
    That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd
    The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
    And barbarism itself have pitied him.  
    But heaven hath a hand in these events,
    To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
    To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,
    Whose state and honour I for aye allow.
  DUCHESS. Here comes my son Aumerle.
  YORK. Aumerle that was
    But that is lost for being Richard's friend,
    And madam, you must call him Rudand now.
    I am in Parliament pledge for his truth
    And lasting fealty to the new-made king.

                  Enter AUMERLE

  DUCHESS. Welcome, my son. Who are the violets now
    That strew the green lap of the new come spring?
  AUMERLE. Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not.
    God knows I had as lief be none as one.
  YORK. Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
    Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.
    What news from Oxford? Do these justs and triumphs hold?  
  AUMERLE. For aught I know, my lord, they do.
  YORK. You will be there, I know.
  AUMERLE. If God prevent not, I purpose so.
  YORK. What seal is that that without thy bosom?
    Yea, look'st thou pale? Let me see the writing.
  AUMERLE. My lord, 'tis nothing.
  YORK. No matter, then, who see it.
    I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.
  AUMERLE. I do beseech your Grace to pardon me;
    It is a matter of small consequence
    Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
  YORK. Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
    I fear, I fear-
  DUCHESS. What should you fear?
    'Tis nothing but some bond that he is ent'red into
    For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph-day.
  YORK. Bound to himself! What doth he with a bond
    That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.
    Boy, let me see the writing.
  AUMERLE. I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.  
  YORK. I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
                [He plucks it out of his bosom, and reads it]
    Treason, foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!
  DUCHESS. What is the matter, my lord?
  YORK. Ho! who is within there?

                    Enter a servant

    Saddle my horse.
    God for his mercy, what treachery is here!
  DUCHESS. Why, York, what is it, my lord?
  YORK. Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.
                                                    Exit servant
    Now, by mine honour, by my life, my troth,
    I will appeach the villain.
  DUCHESS. What is the matter?
  YORK. Peace, foolish woman.
  DUCHESS. I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle?
  AUMERLE. Good mother, be content; it is no more
    Than my poor life must answer.  
  DUCHESS. Thy life answer!
  YORK. Bring me my boots. I will unto the King.

              His man enters with his boots

  DUCHESS. Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amaz'd.
    Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.
  YORK. Give me my boots, I say.
  DUCHESS. Why, York, what wilt thou do?
    Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
    Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
    Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
    And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age
    And rob me of a happy mother's name?
    Is he not like thee? Is he not thine own?
  YORK. Thou fond mad woman,
    Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
    A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,
    And interchangeably set down their hands
    To kill the King at Oxford.  
  DUCHESS. He shall be none;
    We'll keep him here. Then what is that to him?
  YORK. Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son
    I would appeach him.
  DUCHESS. Hadst thou groan'd for him
    As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.
    But now I know thy mind: thou dost suspect
    That I have been disloyal to thy bed
    And that he is a bastard, not thy son.
    Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind.
    He is as like thee as a man may be
    Not like to me, or any of my kin,
    And yet I love him.
  YORK. Make way, unruly woman!                             Exit
  DUCHESS. After, Aumerle! Mount thee upon his horse;
    Spur post, and get before him to the King,
    And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
    I'll not be long behind; though I be old,
    I doubt not but to ride as fast as York;
    And never will I rise up from the ground  
    Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 3.
Windsor Castle

Enter BOLINGBROKE as King, PERCY, and other LORDS

  BOLINGBROKE. Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
    'Tis full three months since I did see him last.
    If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.
    I would to God, my lords, he might be found.
    Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there,
    For there, they say, he daily doth frequent
    With unrestrained loose companions,
    Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes
    And beat our watch and rob our passengers,
    Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy,
    Takes on the point of honour to support
    So dissolute a crew.
  PERCY. My lord, some two days since I saw the Prince,
    And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.
  BOLINGBROKE. And what said the gallant?
  PERCY. His answer was, he would unto the stews,
    And from the common'st creature pluck a glove  
    And wear it as a favour; and with that
    He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
  BOLINGBROKE. As dissolute as desperate; yet through both
    I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years
    May happily bring forth. But who comes here?

                Enter AUMERLE amazed

  AUMERLE. Where is the King?
  BOLINGBROKE. What means our cousin that he stares and looks
    So wildly?
  AUMERLE. God save your Grace! I do beseech your Majesty,
    To have some conference with your Grace alone.
  BOLINGBROKE. Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
                                          Exeunt PERCY and LORDS
    What is the matter with our cousin now?
  AUMERLE. For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
                                                    [Kneels]
    My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth,
    Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.  
  BOLINGBROKE. Intended or committed was this fault?
    If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
    To win thy after-love I pardon thee.
  AUMERLE. Then give me leave that I may turn the key,
    That no man enter till my tale be done.
  BOLINGBROKE. Have thy desire.
            [The DUKE OF YORK knocks at the door and crieth]
  YORK. [Within] My liege, beware; look to thyself;
    Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.
  BOLINGBROKE. [Drawing] Villain, I'll make thee safe.
  AUMERLE. Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.
  YORK. [Within] Open the door, secure, foolhardy King.
    Shall I, for love, speak treason to thy face?
    Open the door, or I will break it open.

                    Enter YORK

  BOLINGBROKE. What is the matter, uncle? Speak;
    Recover breath; tell us how near is danger,
    That we may arm us to encounter it.
  YORK. Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know  
    The treason that my haste forbids me show.
  AUMERLE. Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd.
    I do repent me; read not my name there;
    My heart is not confederate with my hand.
  YORK. It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.
    I tore it from the traitor's bosom, King;
    Fear, and not love, begets his penitence.
    Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
    A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
  BOLINGBROKE. O heinous, strong, and bold conspiracy!
    O loyal father of a treacherous son!
    Thou sheer, immaculate, and silver fountain,
    From whence this stream through muddy passages
    Hath held his current and defil'd himself!
    Thy overflow of good converts to bad;
    And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
    This deadly blot in thy digressing son.
  YORK. So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd;
    And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,
    As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.  
    Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,
    Or my sham'd life in his dishonour lies.
    Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath,
    The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
  DUCHESS. [Within] I What ho, my liege, for God's sake, let me in.
  BOLINGBROKE. What shrill-voic'd suppliant makes this eager cry?
  DUCHESS. [Within] A woman, and thine aunt, great King; 'tis I.
    Speak with me, pity me, open the door.
    A beggar begs that never begg'd before.
  BOLINGBROKE. Our scene is alt'red from a serious thing,
    And now chang'd to 'The Beggar and the King.'
    My dangerous cousin, let your mother in.
    I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.
  YORK. If thou do pardon whosoever pray,
    More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
    This fest'red joint cut off, the rest rest sound;
    This let alone will all the rest confound.

                 Enter DUCHESS
  
  DUCHESS. O King, believe not this hard-hearted man!
    Love loving not itself, none other can.
  YORK. Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
    Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
  DUCHESS. Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.
                                                     [Kneels]
  BOLINGBROKE. Rise up, good aunt.
  DUCHESS. Not yet, I thee beseech.
    For ever will I walk upon my knees,
    And never see day that the happy sees
    Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy
    By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.
  AUMERLE. Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.
                                                     [Kneels]
  YORK. Against them both, my true joints bended be.
                                                     [Kneels]
    Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!
  DUCHESS. Pleads he in earnest? Look upon his face;
    His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;
    His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast.  
    He prays but faintly and would be denied;
    We pray with heart and soul, and all beside.
    His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;
    Our knees still kneel till to the ground they grow.
    His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;
    Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.
    Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have
    That mercy which true prayer ought to have.
  BOLINGBROKE. Good aunt, stand up.
  DUCHESS. do not say 'stand up';
    Say 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.'
    An if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,
    'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.
    I never long'd to hear a word till now;
    Say 'pardon,' King; let pity teach thee how.
    The word is short, but not so short as sweet;
    No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.
  YORK. Speak it in French, King, say 'pardonne moy.'
  DUCHESS. Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
    Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,  
    That sets the word itself against the word!
    Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land;
    The chopping French we do not understand.
    Thine eye begins to speak, set thy tongue there;
    Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear,
    That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
    Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.
  BOLINGBROKE. Good aunt, stand up.
  DUCHESS. I do not sue to stand;
    Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.
  BOLINGBROKE. I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.
  DUCHESS. O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!
    Yet am I sick for fear. Speak it again.
    Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,
    But makes one pardon strong.
  BOLINGBROKE. With all my heart
    I pardon him.
  DUCHESS. A god on earth thou art.
  BOLINGBROKE. But for our trusty brother-in-law and the Abbot,
    With all the rest of that consorted crew,  
    Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
    Good uncle, help to order several powers
    To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are.
    They shall not live within this world, I swear,
    But I will have them, if I once know where.
    Uncle, farewell; and, cousin, adieu;
    Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.
  DUCHESS. Come, my old son; I pray God make thee new.      Exeunt




SCENE 4.
Windsor Castle

Enter SIR PIERCE OF EXTON and a servant

  EXTON. Didst thou not mark the King, what words he spake?
    'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?'
    Was it not so?
  SERVANT. These were his very words.
  EXTON. 'Have I no friend?' quoth he. He spake it twice
    And urg'd it twice together, did he not?
  SERVANT. He did.
  EXTON. And, speaking it, he wishtly look'd on me,
    As who should say 'I would thou wert the man
    That would divorce this terror from my heart';
    Meaning the King at Pomfret. Come, let's go.
    I am the King's friend, and will rid his foe.         Exeunt




SCENE 5.
Pomfret Castle. The dungeon of the Castle

Enter KING RICHARD

  KING RICHARD. I have been studying how I may compare
    This prison where I live unto the world
    And, for because the world is populous
    And here is not a creature but myself,
    I cannot do it. Yet I'll hammer it out.
    My brain I'll prove the female to my soul,
    My soul the father; and these two beget
    A generation of still-breeding thoughts,
    And these same thoughts people this little world,
    In humours like the people of this world,
    For no thought is contented. The better sort,
    As thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd
    With scruples, and do set the word itself
    Against the word,
    As thus: 'Come, little ones'; and then again,
    'It is as hard to come as for a camel
    To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.'  
    Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot
    Unlikely wonders: how these vain weak nails
    May tear a passage through the flinty ribs
    Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls;
    And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
    Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
    That they are not the first of fortune's slaves,
    Nor shall not be the last; like silly beggars
    Who, sitting in the stocks, refuge their shame,
    That many have and others must sit there;
    And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
    Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
    Of such as have before endur'd the like.
    Thus play I in one person many people,
    And none contented. Sometimes am I king;
    Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
    And so I am. Then crushing penury
    Persuades me I was better when a king;
    Then am I king'd again; and by and by
    Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke,  
    And straight am nothing. But whate'er I be,
    Nor I, nor any man that but man is,
    With nothing shall be pleas'd till he be eas'd
    With being nothing.                    [The music plays]
    Music do I hear?
    Ha, ha! keep time. How sour sweet music is
    When time is broke and no proportion kept!
    So is it in the music of men's lives.
    And here have I the daintiness of ear
    To check time broke in a disorder'd string;
    But, for the concord of my state and time,
    Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
    I wasted time, and now doth time waste me;
    For now hath time made me his numb'ring clock:
    My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar
    Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,
    Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,
    Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
    Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
    Are clamorous groans which strike upon my heart,  
    Which is the bell. So sighs, and tears, and groans,
    Show minutes, times, and hours; but my time
    Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,
    While I stand fooling here, his Jack of the clock.
    This music mads me. Let it sound no more;
    For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
    In me it seems it will make wise men mad.
    Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!
    For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard
    Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.

              Enter a GROOM of the stable

  GROOM. Hail, royal Prince!
  KING RICHARD. Thanks, noble peer!
    The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.
    What art thou? and how comest thou hither,
    Where no man never comes but that sad dog
    That brings me food to make misfortune live?
  GROOM. I was a poor groom of thy stable, King,  
    When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York,
    With much ado at length have gotten leave
    To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
    O, how it ern'd my heart, when I beheld,
    In London streets, that coronation-day,
    When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary-
    That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,
    That horse that I so carefully have dress'd!
  KING RICHARD. Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,
    How went he under him?
  GROOM. So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.
  KING RICHARD. So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!
    That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;
    This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
    Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,
    Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck
    Of that proud man that did usurp his back?
    Forgiveness, horse! Why do I rail on thee,
    Since thou, created to be aw'd by man,
    Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse;  
    And yet I bear a burden like an ass,
    Spurr'd, gall'd, and tir'd, by jauncing Bolingbroke.

              Enter KEEPER with meat

  KEEPER. Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.
  KING RICHARD. If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.
  GROOM. my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
 Exit
  KEEPER. My lord, will't please you to fall to?
  KING RICHARD. Taste of it first as thou art wont to do.
  KEEPER. My lord, I dare not. Sir Pierce of Exton,
    Who lately came from the King, commands the contrary.
  KING RICHARD. The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
    Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.
                                           [Beats the KEEPER]
  KEEPER. Help, help, help!
    The murderers, EXTON and servants, rush in, armed
  KING RICHARD. How now! What means death in this rude assault?
    Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.  
                         [Snatching a weapon and killing one]
    Go thou and fill another room in hell.
              [He kills another, then EXTON strikes him down]
    That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire
    That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand
    Hath with the King's blood stain'd the King's own land.
    Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high;
    Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.
                                                       [Dies]
  EXTON. As full of valour as of royal blood.
    Both have I spill'd. O, would the deed were good!
    For now the devil, that told me I did well,
    Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.
    This dead King to the living King I'll bear.
    Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.       Exeunt




SCENE 6.
Windsor Castle

Flourish. Enter BOLINGBROKE, the DUKE OF YORK, With other LORDS
and attendants

  BOLINGBROKE. Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
    Is that the rebels have consum'd with fire
    Our town of Ciceter in Gloucestershire;
    But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.

              Enter NORTHUMBERLAND

    Welcome, my lord. What is the news?
  NORTHUMBERLAND. First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.
    The next news is, I have to London sent
    The heads of Salisbury, Spencer, Blunt, and Kent.
    The manner of their taking may appear
    At large discoursed in this paper here.
  BOLINGBROKE. We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;
    And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
  
                  Enter FITZWATER

  FITZWATER. My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London
    The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely;
    Two of the dangerous consorted traitors
    That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.
  BOLINGBROKE. Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;
    Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.

         Enter PERCY, With the BISHOP OF CARLISLE

  PERCY. The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
    With clog of conscience and sour melancholy,
    Hath yielded up his body to the grave;
    But here is Carlisle living, to abide
    Thy kingly doom, and sentence of his pride.
  BOLINGBROKE. Carlisle, this is your doom:
    Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
    More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;
    So as thou liv'st in peace, die free from strife;  
    For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
    High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.

      Enter EXTON, with attendants, hearing a coffin

  EXTON. Great King, within this coffin I present
    Thy buried fear. Herein all breathless lies
    The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,
    Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.
  BOLINGBROKE. Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought
    A deed of slander with thy fatal hand
    Upon my head and all this famous land.
  EXTON. From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.
  BOLINGBROKE. They love not poison that do poison need,
    Nor do I thee. Though I did wish him dead,
    I hate the murderer, love him murdered.
    The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,
    But neither my good word nor princely favour;
    With Cain go wander thorough shades of night,
    And never show thy head by day nor light.  
    Lords, I protest my soul is full of woe
    That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow.
    Come, mourn with me for what I do lament,
    And put on sullen black incontinent.
    I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land,
    To wash this blood off from my guilty hand.
    March sadly after; grace my mournings here
    In weeping after this untimely bier.                  Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1593

KING RICHARD III

by William Shakespeare


Dramatis Personae

  EDWARD THE FOURTH

    Sons to the King
  EDWARD, PRINCE OF WALES afterwards KING EDWARD V
  RICHARD, DUKE OF YORK,

    Brothers to the King
  GEORGE, DUKE OF CLARENCE,
  RICHARD, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, afterwards KING RICHARD III

  A YOUNG SON OF CLARENCE (Edward, Earl of Warwick)
  HENRY, EARL OF RICHMOND, afterwards KING HENRY VII
  CARDINAL BOURCHIER, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY
  THOMAS ROTHERHAM, ARCHBISHOP OF YORK
  JOHN MORTON, BISHOP OF ELY
  DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
  DUKE OF NORFOLK
  EARL OF SURREY, his son
  EARL RIVERS, brother to King Edward's Queen
  MARQUIS OF DORSET and LORD GREY, her sons
  EARL OF OXFORD  
  LORD HASTINGS
  LORD LOVEL
  LORD STANLEY, called also EARL OF DERBY
  SIR THOMAS VAUGHAN
  SIR RICHARD RATCLIFF
  SIR WILLIAM CATESBY
  SIR JAMES TYRREL
  SIR JAMES BLOUNT
  SIR WALTER HERBERT
  SIR WILLIAM BRANDON
  SIR ROBERT BRAKENBURY, Lieutenant of the Tower
  CHRISTOPHER URSWICK, a priest
  LORD MAYOR OF LONDON
  SHERIFF OF WILTSHIRE
  HASTINGS, a pursuivant
  TRESSEL and BERKELEY, gentlemen attending on Lady Anne
  ELIZABETH, Queen to King Edward IV
  MARGARET, widow of King Henry VI
  DUCHESS OF YORK, mother to King Edward IV
  LADY ANNE, widow of Edward, Prince of Wales, son to King  
    Henry VI; afterwards married to the Duke of Gloucester
  A YOUNG DAUGHTER OF CLARENCE (Margaret Plantagenet,
    Countess of Salisbury)
  Ghosts, of Richard's victims
  Lords, Gentlemen, and Attendants; Priest, Scrivener, Page, Bishops,
    Aldermen, Citizens, Soldiers, Messengers, Murderers, Keeper




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE: England

King Richard the Third



ACT I. SCENE 1.

London. A street

Enter RICHARD, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, solus

  GLOUCESTER. Now is the winter of our discontent
    Made glorious summer by this sun of York;
    And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house
    In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
    Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;
    Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
    Our stern alarums chang'd to merry meetings,
    Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
    Grim-visag'd war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front,
    And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds
    To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
    He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
    To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
    But I-that am not shap'd for sportive tricks,
    Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass-
    I-that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty
    To strut before a wanton ambling nymph-  
    I-that am curtail'd of this fair proportion,
    Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
    Deform'd, unfinish'd, sent before my time
    Into this breathing world scarce half made up,
    And that so lamely and unfashionable
    That dogs bark at me as I halt by them-
    Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
    Have no delight to pass away the time,
    Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
    And descant on mine own deformity.
    And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover
    To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
    I am determined to prove a villain
    And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
    Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
    By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams,
    To set my brother Clarence and the King
    In deadly hate the one against the other;
    And if King Edward be as true and just
    As I am subtle, false, and treacherous,  
    This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up-
    About a prophecy which says that G
    Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
    Dive, thoughts, down to my soul. Here Clarence comes.

             Enter CLARENCE, guarded, and BRAKENBURY

    Brother, good day. What means this armed guard
    That waits upon your Grace?
  CLARENCE. His Majesty,
    Tend'ring my person's safety, hath appointed
    This conduct to convey me to th' Tower.
  GLOUCESTER. Upon what cause?
  CLARENCE. Because my name is George.
  GLOUCESTER. Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours:
    He should, for that, commit your godfathers.
    O, belike his Majesty hath some intent
    That you should be new-christ'ned in the Tower.
    But what's the matter, Clarence? May I know?
  CLARENCE. Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest  
    As yet I do not; but, as I can learn,
    He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
    And from the cross-row plucks the letter G,
    And says a wizard told him that by G
    His issue disinherited should be;
    And, for my name of George begins with G,
    It follows in his thought that I am he.
    These, as I learn, and such like toys as these
    Hath mov'd his Highness to commit me now.
  GLOUCESTER. Why, this it is when men are rul'd by women:
    'Tis not the King that sends you to the Tower;
    My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she
    That tempers him to this extremity.
    Was it not she and that good man of worship,
    Antony Woodville, her brother there,
    That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
    From whence this present day he is delivered?
    We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.
  CLARENCE. By heaven, I think there is no man is secure
    But the Queen's kindred, and night-walking heralds  
    That trudge betwixt the King and Mistress Shore.
    Heard you not what an humble suppliant
    Lord Hastings was, for her delivery?
  GLOUCESTER. Humbly complaining to her deity
    Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.
    I'll tell you what-I think it is our way,
    If we will keep in favour with the King,
    To be her men and wear her livery:
    The jealous o'er-worn widow, and herself,
    Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen,
    Are mighty gossips in our monarchy.
  BRAKENBURY. I beseech your Graces both to pardon me:
    His Majesty hath straitly given in charge
    That no man shall have private conference,
    Of what degree soever, with your brother.
  GLOUCESTER. Even so; an't please your worship, Brakenbury,
    You may partake of any thing we say:
    We speak no treason, man; we say the King
    Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen
    Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous;  
    We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
    A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue;
    And that the Queen's kindred are made gentlefolks.
    How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?
  BRAKENBURY. With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.
  GLOUCESTER. Naught to do with Mistress Shore! I tell thee,
    fellow,
    He that doth naught with her, excepting one,
    Were best to do it secretly alone.
  BRAKENBURY. What one, my lord?
  GLOUCESTER. Her husband, knave! Wouldst thou betray me?
  BRAKENBURY. I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and
    withal
    Forbear your conference with the noble Duke.
  CLARENCE. We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will
    obey.
  GLOUCESTER. We are the Queen's abjects and must obey.
    Brother, farewell; I will unto the King;
    And whatsoe'er you will employ me in-
    Were it to call King Edward's widow sister-  
    I will perform it to enfranchise you.
    Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood
    Touches me deeper than you can imagine.
  CLARENCE. I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
  GLOUCESTER. Well, your imprisonment shall not be long;
    I will deliver or else lie for you.
    Meantime, have patience.
  CLARENCE. I must perforce. Farewell.
                          Exeunt CLARENCE, BRAKENBURY, and guard
  GLOUCESTER. Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.
    Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so
    That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
    If heaven will take the present at our hands.
    But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?

                       Enter LORD HASTINGS

  HASTINGS. Good time of day unto my gracious lord!
  GLOUCESTER. As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain!
    Well are you welcome to the open air.  
    How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment?
  HASTINGS. With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must;
    But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
    That were the cause of my imprisonment.
  GLOUCESTER. No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too;
    For they that were your enemies are his,
    And have prevail'd as much on him as you.
  HASTINGS. More pity that the eagles should be mew'd
    Whiles kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
  GLOUCESTER. What news abroad?
  HASTINGS. No news so bad abroad as this at home:
    The King is sickly, weak, and melancholy,
    And his physicians fear him mightily.
  GLOUCESTER. Now, by Saint John, that news is bad indeed.
    O, he hath kept an evil diet long
    And overmuch consum'd his royal person!
    'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.
    Where is he? In his bed?
  HASTINGS. He is.
  GLOUCESTER. Go you before, and I will follow you.  
                                                   Exit HASTINGS
    He cannot live, I hope, and must not die
    Till George be pack'd with posthorse up to heaven.
    I'll in to urge his hatred more to Clarence
    With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments;
    And, if I fail not in my deep intent,
    Clarence hath not another day to live;
    Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
    And leave the world for me to bustle in!
    For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.
    What though I kill'd her husband and her father?
    The readiest way to make the wench amends
    Is to become her husband and her father;
    The which will I-not all so much for love
    As for another secret close intent
    By marrying her which I must reach unto.
    But yet I run before my horse to market.
    Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns;
    When they are gone, then must I count my gains.         Exit




SCENE 2.

London. Another street

Enter corpse of KING HENRY THE SIXTH, with halberds to guard it;
LADY ANNE being the mourner, attended by TRESSEL and BERKELEY

  ANNE. Set down, set down your honourable load-
    If honour may be shrouded in a hearse;
    Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
    Th' untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
    Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!
    Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster!
    Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood!
    Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost
    To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,
    Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son,
    Stabb'd by the self-same hand that made these wounds.
    Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life
    I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.
    O, cursed be the hand that made these holes!
    Cursed the heart that had the heart to do it!  
    Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
    More direful hap betide that hated wretch
    That makes us wretched by the death of thee
    Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads,
    Or any creeping venom'd thing that lives!
    If ever he have child, abortive be it,
    Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
    Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
    May fright the hopeful mother at the view,
    And that be heir to his unhappiness!
    If ever he have wife, let her be made
    More miserable by the death of him
    Than I am made by my young lord and thee!
    Come, now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
    Taken from Paul's to be interred there;
    And still as you are weary of this weight
    Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse.
                                [The bearers take up the coffin]

                      Enter GLOUCESTER  

  GLOUCESTER. Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
  ANNE. What black magician conjures up this fiend
    To stop devoted charitable deeds?
  GLOUCESTER. Villains, set down the corse; or, by Saint Paul,
    I'll make a corse of him that disobeys!
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. My lord, stand back, and let the coffin
    pass.
  GLOUCESTER. Unmannerd dog! Stand thou, when I command.
    Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,
    Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot
    And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
                               [The bearers set down the coffin]
  ANNE. What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid?
    Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,
    And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.
    Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!
    Thou hadst but power over his mortal body,
    His soul thou canst not have; therefore, be gone.
  GLOUCESTER. Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.  
  ANNE. Foul devil, for God's sake, hence and trouble us not;
    For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell
    Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
    If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
    Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
    O, gentlemen, see, see! Dead Henry's wounds
    Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh.
    Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity,
    For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood
    From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells;
    Thy deeds inhuman and unnatural
    Provokes this deluge most unnatural.
    O God, which this blood mad'st, revenge his death!
    O earth, which this blood drink'st, revenge his death!
    Either, heav'n, with lightning strike the murd'rer dead;
    Or, earth, gape open wide and eat him quick,
    As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood,
    Which his hell-govern'd arm hath butchered.
  GLOUCESTER. Lady, you know no rules of charity,
    Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.  
  ANNE. Villain, thou knowest nor law of God nor man:
    No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
  GLOUCESTER. But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
  ANNE. O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
  GLOUCESTER. More wonderful when angels are so angry.
    Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,
    Of these supposed crimes to give me leave
    By circumstance but to acquit myself.
  ANNE. Vouchsafe, diffus'd infection of a man,
    Of these known evils but to give me leave
    By circumstance to accuse thy cursed self.
  GLOUCESTER. Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have
    Some patient leisure to excuse myself.
  ANNE. Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
    No excuse current but to hang thyself.
  GLOUCESTER. By such despair I should accuse myself.
  ANNE. And by despairing shalt thou stand excused
    For doing worthy vengeance on thyself
    That didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
  GLOUCESTER. Say that I slew them not?  
  ANNE. Then say they were not slain.
    But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee.
  GLOUCESTER. I did not kill your husband.
  ANNE. Why, then he is alive.
  GLOUCESTER. Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward's hands.
  ANNE. In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw
    Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood;
    The which thou once didst bend against her breast,
    But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
  GLOUCESTER. I was provoked by her sland'rous tongue
    That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
  ANNE. Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind,
    That never dream'st on aught but butcheries.
    Didst thou not kill this king?
  GLOUCESTER. I grant ye.
  ANNE. Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then, God grant me to
    Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed!
    O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!
  GLOUCESTER. The better for the King of Heaven, that hath
    him.  
  ANNE. He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
  GLOUCESTER. Let him thank me that holp to send him
    thither,
    For he was fitter for that place than earth.
  ANNE. And thou unfit for any place but hell.
  GLOUCESTER. Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
  ANNE. Some dungeon.
  GLOUCESTER. Your bed-chamber.
  ANNE. Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
  GLOUCESTER. So will it, madam, till I lie with you.
  ANNE. I hope so.
  GLOUCESTER. I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,
    To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
    And fall something into a slower method-
    Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
    Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
    As blameful as the executioner?
  ANNE. Thou wast the cause and most accurs'd effect.
  GLOUCESTER. Your beauty was the cause of that effect-
    Your beauty that did haunt me in my sleep  
    To undertake the death of all the world
    So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
  ANNE. If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
    These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
  GLOUCESTER. These eyes could not endure that beauty's
    wreck;
    You should not blemish it if I stood by.
    As all the world is cheered by the sun,
    So I by that; it is my day, my life.
  ANNE. Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life!
  GLOUCESTER. Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.
  ANNE. I would I were, to be reveng'd on thee.
  GLOUCESTER. It is a quarrel most unnatural,
    To be reveng'd on him that loveth thee.
  ANNE. It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
    To be reveng'd on him that kill'd my husband.
  GLOUCESTER. He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband
    Did it to help thee to a better husband.
  ANNE. His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
  GLOUCESTER. He lives that loves thee better than he could.  
  ANNE. Name him.
  GLOUCESTER. Plantagenet.
  ANNE. Why, that was he.
  GLOUCESTER. The self-same name, but one of better nature.
  ANNE. Where is he?
  GLOUCESTER. Here.  [She spits at him]  Why dost thou spit
    at me?
  ANNE. Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!
  GLOUCESTER. Never came poison from so sweet a place.
  ANNE. Never hung poison on a fouler toad.
    Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.
  GLOUCESTER. Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
  ANNE. Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead!
  GLOUCESTER. I would they were, that I might die at once;
    For now they kill me with a living death.
    Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,
    Sham'd their aspects with store of childish drops-
    These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear,
    No, when my father York and Edward wept
    To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made  
    When black-fac'd Clifford shook his sword at him;
    Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
    Told the sad story of my father's death,
    And twenty times made pause to sob and weep
    That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
    Like trees bedash'd with rain-in that sad time
    My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;
    And what these sorrows could not thence exhale
    Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.
    I never sued to friend nor enemy;
    My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word;
    But, now thy beauty is propos'd my fee,
    My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
                                   [She looks scornfully at him]
    Teach not thy lip such scorn; for it was made
    For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.
    If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
    Lo here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword;
    Which if thou please to hide in this true breast
    And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,  
    I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
    And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
      [He lays his breast open; she offers at it with his sword]
    Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry-
    But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.
    Nay, now dispatch; 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward-
    But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
                                           [She falls the sword]
    Take up the sword again, or take up me.
  ANNE. Arise, dissembler; though I wish thy death,
    I will not be thy executioner.
  GLOUCESTER. Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it;
  ANNE. I have already.
  GLOUCESTER. That was in thy rage.
    Speak it again, and even with the word
    This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love,
    Shall for thy love kill a far truer love;
    To both their deaths shalt thou be accessary.
  ANNE. I would I knew thy heart.
  GLOUCESTER. 'Tis figur'd in my tongue.  
  ANNE. I fear me both are false.
  GLOUCESTER. Then never was man true.
  ANNE. well put up your sword.
  GLOUCESTER. Say, then, my peace is made.
  ANNE. That shalt thou know hereafter.
  GLOUCESTER. But shall I live in hope?
  ANNE. All men, I hope, live so.
  GLOUCESTER. Vouchsafe to wear this ring.
  ANNE. To take is not to give.               [Puts on the ring]
  GLOUCESTER. Look how my ring encompasseth thy finger,
    Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart;
    Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
    And if thy poor devoted servant may
    But beg one favour at thy gracious hand,
    Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.
  ANNE. What is it?
  GLOUCESTER. That it may please you leave these sad designs
    To him that hath most cause to be a mourner,
    And presently repair to Crosby House;
    Where-after I have solemnly interr'd  
    At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king,
    And wet his grave with my repentant tears-
    I will with all expedient duty see you.
    For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you,
    Grant me this boon.
  ANNE. With all my heart; and much it joys me too
    To see you are become so penitent.
    Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.
  GLOUCESTER. Bid me farewell.
  ANNE. 'Tis more than you deserve;
    But since you teach me how to flatter you,
    Imagine I have said farewell already.
                             Exeunt two GENTLEMEN With LADY ANNE
  GLOUCESTER. Sirs, take up the corse.
  GENTLEMEN. Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
  GLOUCESTER. No, to White Friars; there attend my coming.
                                       Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
    Was ever woman in this humour woo'd?
    Was ever woman in this humour won?
    I'll have her; but I will not keep her long.  
    What! I that kill'd her husband and his father-
    To take her in her heart's extremest hate,
    With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
    The bleeding witness of my hatred by;
    Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me,
    And I no friends to back my suit at all
    But the plain devil and dissembling looks,
    And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
    Ha!
    Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
    Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since,
    Stabb'd in my angry mood at Tewksbury?
    A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman-
    Fram'd in the prodigality of nature,
    Young, valiant, wise, and no doubt right royal-
    The spacious world cannot again afford;
    And will she yet abase her eyes on me,
    That cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince
    And made her widow to a woeful bed?
    On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety?  
    On me, that halts and am misshapen thus?
    My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
    I do mistake my person all this while.
    Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,
    Myself to be a marv'llous proper man.
    I'll be at charges for a looking-glass,
    And entertain a score or two of tailors
    To study fashions to adorn my body.
    Since I am crept in favour with myself,
    I will maintain it with some little cost.
    But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave,
    And then return lamenting to my love.
    Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
    That I may see my shadow as I pass.                     Exit




SCENE 3.

London. The palace

Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH, LORD RIVERS, and LORD GREY

  RIVERS. Have patience, madam; there's no doubt his Majesty
    Will soon recover his accustom'd health.
  GREY. In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse;
    Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort,
    And cheer his Grace with quick and merry eyes.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. If he were dead, what would betide on
    me?
  GREY. No other harm but loss of such a lord.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. The loss of such a lord includes all
    harms.
  GREY. The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son
    To be your comforter when he is gone.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Ah, he is young; and his minority
    Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
    A man that loves not me, nor none of you.
  RIVER. Is it concluded he shall be Protector?  
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. It is determin'd, not concluded yet;
    But so it must be, if the King miscarry.

                     Enter BUCKINGHAM and DERBY

  GREY. Here come the Lords of Buckingham and Derby.
  BUCKINGHAM. Good time of day unto your royal Grace!
  DERBY. God make your Majesty joyful as you have been.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. The Countess Richmond, good my Lord
    of Derby,
    To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.
    Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife
    And loves not me, be you, good lord, assur'd
    I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
  DERBY. I do beseech you, either not believe
    The envious slanders of her false accusers;
    Or, if she be accus'd on true report,
    Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds
    From wayward sickness and no grounded malice.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Saw you the King to-day, my Lord of  
    Derby?
  DERBY. But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
    Are come from visiting his Majesty.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. What likelihood of his amendment,
    Lords?
  BUCKINGHAM. Madam, good hope; his Grace speaks
    cheerfully.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. God grant him health! Did you confer
    with him?
  BUCKINGHAM. Ay, madam; he desires to make atonement
    Between the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
    And between them and my Lord Chamberlain;
    And sent to warn them to his royal presence.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Would all were well! But that will
    never be.
    I fear our happiness is at the height.

              Enter GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and DORSET

  GLOUCESTER. They do me wrong, and I will not endure it.  
    Who is it that complains unto the King
    That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not?
    By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly
    That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.
    Because I cannot flatter and look fair,
    Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive, and cog,
    Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
    I must be held a rancorous enemy.
    Cannot a plain man live and think no harm
    But thus his simple truth must be abus'd
    With silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?
  GREY. To who in all this presence speaks your Grace?
  GLOUCESTER. To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
    When have I injur'd thee? when done thee wrong,
    Or thee, or thee, or any of your faction?
    A plague upon you all! His royal Grace-
    Whom God preserve better than you would wish!-
    Cannot be quiet searce a breathing while
    But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the  
    matter.
    The King, on his own royal disposition
    And not provok'd by any suitor else-
    Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred
    That in your outward action shows itself
    Against my children, brothers, and myself-
    Makes him to send that he may learn the ground.
  GLOUCESTER. I cannot tell; the world is grown so bad
    That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.
    Since every Jack became a gentleman,
    There's many a gentle person made a Jack.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Come, come, we know your meaning,
    brother Gloucester:
    You envy my advancement and my friends';
    God grant we never may have need of you!
  GLOUCESTER. Meantime, God grants that I have need of you.
    Our brother is imprison'd by your means,
    Myself disgrac'd, and the nobility
    Held in contempt; while great promotions
    Are daily given to ennoble those  
    That scarce some two days since were worth a noble.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. By Him that rais'd me to this careful
    height
    From that contented hap which I enjoy'd,
    I never did incense his Majesty
    Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
    An earnest advocate to plead for him.
    My lord, you do me shameful injury
    Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
  GLOUCESTER. You may deny that you were not the mean
    Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.
  RIVERS. She may, my lord; for-
  GLOUCESTER. She may, Lord Rivers? Why, who knows
    not so?
    She may do more, sir, than denying that:
    She may help you to many fair preferments
    And then deny her aiding hand therein,
    And lay those honours on your high desert.
    What may she not? She may-ay, marry, may she-
  RIVERS. What, marry, may she?  
  GLOUCESTER. What, marry, may she? Marry with a king,
    A bachelor, and a handsome stripling too.
    Iwis your grandam had a worser match.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long
    borne
    Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs.
    By heaven, I will acquaint his Majesty
    Of those gross taunts that oft I have endur'd.
    I had rather be a country servant-maid
    Than a great queen with this condition-
    To be so baited, scorn'd, and stormed at.

                Enter old QUEEN MARGARET, behind

    Small joy have I in being England's Queen.
  QUEEN MARGARET. And less'ned be that small, God, I
    beseech Him!
    Thy honour, state, and seat, is due to me.
  GLOUCESTER. What! Threat you me with telling of the
    King?  
    Tell him and spare not. Look what I have said
    I will avouch't in presence of the King.
    I dare adventure to be sent to th' Tow'r.
    'Tis time to speak-my pains are quite forgot.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Out, devil! I do remember them to
    well:
    Thou kill'dst my husband Henry in the Tower,
    And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.
  GLOUCESTER. Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband
    King,
    I was a pack-horse in his great affairs,
    A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,
    A liberal rewarder of his friends;
    To royalize his blood I spent mine own.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Ay, and much better blood than his or
    thine.
  GLOUCESTER. In all which time you and your husband Grey
    Were factious for the house of Lancaster;
    And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband
    In Margaret's battle at Saint Albans slain?  
    Let me put in your minds, if you forget,
    What you have been ere this, and what you are;
    Withal, what I have been, and what I am.
  QUEEN MARGARET. A murd'rous villain, and so still thou art.
  GLOUCESTER. Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick,
    Ay, and forswore himself-which Jesu pardon!-
  QUEEN MARGARET. Which God revenge!
  GLOUCESTER. To fight on Edward's party for the crown;
    And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up.
    I would to God my heart were flint like Edward's,
    Or Edward's soft and pitiful like mine.
    I am too childish-foolish for this world.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Hie thee to hell for shame and leave this
    world,
    Thou cacodemon; there thy kingdom is.
  RIVERS. My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
    Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
    We follow'd then our lord, our sovereign king.
    So should we you, if you should be our king.
  GLOUCESTER. If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar.  
    Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. As little joy, my lord, as you suppose
    You should enjoy were you this country's king,
    As little joy you may suppose in me
    That I enjoy, being the Queen thereof.
  QUEEN MARGARET. As little joy enjoys the Queen thereof;
    For I am she, and altogether joyless.
    I can no longer hold me patient.                 [Advancing]
    Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out
    In sharing that which you have pill'd from me.
    Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
    If not that, I am Queen, you bow like subjects,
    Yet that, by you depos'd, you quake like rebels?
    Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away!
  GLOUCESTER. Foul wrinkled witch, what mak'st thou in my
    sight?
  QUEEN MARGARET. But repetition of what thou hast marr'd,
    That will I make before I let thee go.
  GLOUCESTER. Wert thou not banished on pain of death?
  QUEEN MARGARET. I was; but I do find more pain in  
    banishment
    Than death can yield me here by my abode.
    A husband and a son thou ow'st to me;
    And thou a kingdom; all of you allegiance.
    This sorrow that I have by right is yours;
    And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
  GLOUCESTER. The curse my noble father laid on thee,
    When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper
    And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes,
    And then to dry them gav'st the Duke a clout
    Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland-
    His curses then from bitterness of soul
    Denounc'd against thee are all fall'n upon thee;
    And God, not we, hath plagu'd thy bloody deed.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. So just is God to right the innocent.
  HASTINGS. O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
    And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
  RIVERS. Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
  DORSET. No man but prophesied revenge for it.
  BUCKINGHAM. Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.  
  QUEEN MARGARET. What, were you snarling all before I came,
    Ready to catch each other by the throat,
    And turn you all your hatred now on me?
    Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven
    That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death,
    Their kingdom's loss, my woeful banishment,
    Should all but answer for that peevish brat?
    Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
    Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
    Though not by war, by surfeit die your king,
    As ours by murder, to make him a king!
    Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales,
    For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales,
    Die in his youth by like untimely violence!
    Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
    Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!
    Long mayest thou live to wail thy children's death,
    And see another, as I see thee now,
    Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine!
    Long die thy happy days before thy death;  
    And, after many length'ned hours of grief,
    Die neither mother, wife, nor England's Queen!
    Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,
    And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
    Was stabb'd with bloody daggers. God, I pray him,
    That none of you may live his natural age,
    But by some unlook'd accident cut off!
  GLOUCESTER. Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd
    hag.
  QUEEN MARGARET. And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou
    shalt hear me.
    If heaven have any grievous plague in store
    Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
    O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
    And then hurl down their indignation
    On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace!
    The worm of conscience still be-gnaw thy soul!
    Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv'st,
    And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!
    No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,  
    Unless it be while some tormenting dream
    Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
    Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog,
    Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity
    The slave of nature and the son of hell,
    Thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb,
    Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins,
    Thou rag of honour, thou detested-
  GLOUCESTER. Margaret!
  QUEEN MARGARET. Richard!
  GLOUCESTER. Ha?
  QUEEN MARGARET. I call thee not.
  GLOUCESTER. I cry thee mercy then, for I did think
    That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Why, so I did, but look'd for no reply.
    O, let me make the period to my curse!
  GLOUCESTER. 'Tis done by me, and ends in-Margaret.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Thus have you breath'd your curse
    against yourself.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my  
    fortune!
    Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider
    Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
    Fool, fool! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.
    The day will come that thou shalt wish for me
    To help thee curse this poisonous bunch-back'd toad.
  HASTINGS. False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
    Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Foul shame upon you! you have all
    mov'd mine.
  RIVERS. Were you well serv'd, you would be taught your
      duty.
  QUEEN MARGARET. To serve me well you all should do me
    duty,
    Teach me to be your queen and you my subjects.
    O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
  DORSET. Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
  QUEEN MARGARET. Peace, Master Marquis, you are malapert;
    Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.
    O, that your young nobility could judge  
    What 'twere to lose it and be miserable!
    They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,
    And if they fall they dash themselves to pieces.
  GLOUCESTER. Good counsel, marry; learn it, learn it, Marquis.
  DORSET. It touches you, my lord, as much as me.
  GLOUCESTER. Ay, and much more; but I was born so high,
    Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top,
    And dallies with the wind, and scorns the sun.
  QUEEN MARGARET. And turns the sun to shade-alas! alas!
    Witness my son, now in the shade of death,
    Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
    Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
    Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest.
    O God that seest it, do not suffer it;
    As it is won with blood, lost be it so!
  BUCKINGHAM. Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity!
  QUEEN MARGARET. Urge neither charity nor shame to me.
    Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
    And shamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd.
    My charity is outrage, life my shame;  
    And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage!
  BUCKINGHAM. Have done, have done.
  QUEEN MARGARET. O princely Buckingham, I'll kiss thy
    hand
    In sign of league and amity with thee.
    Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!
    Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
    Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
  BUCKINGHAM. Nor no one here; for curses never pass
    The lips of those that breathe them in the air.
  QUEEN MARGARET. I will not think but they ascend the sky
    And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.
    O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!
    Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,
    His venom tooth will rankle to the death:
    Have not to do with him, beware of him;
    Sin, death, and hell, have set their marks on him,
    And all their ministers attend on him.
  GLOUCESTER. What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?
  BUCKINGHAM. Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.  
  QUEEN MARGARET. What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle
    counsel,
    And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
    O, but remember this another day,
    When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
    And say poor Margaret was a prophetess!
    Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
    And he to yours, and all of you to God's!               Exit
  BUCKINGHAM. My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
  RIVERS. And so doth mine. I muse why she's at liberty.
  GLOUCESTER. I cannot blame her; by God's holy Mother,
    She hath had too much wrong; and I repent
    My part thereof that I have done to her.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. I never did her any to my knowledge.
  GLOUCESTER. Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong.
    I was too hot to do somebody good
    That is too cold in thinking of it now.
    Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;
    He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains;
    God pardon them that are the cause thereof!  
  RIVERS. A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,
    To pray for them that have done scathe to us!
  GLOUCESTER. So do I ever-  [Aside]  being well advis'd;
    For had I curs'd now, I had curs'd myself.

                         Enter CATESBY

  CATESBY. Madam, his Majesty doth can for you,
    And for your Grace, and you, my gracious lords.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Catesby, I come. Lords, will you go
    with me?
  RIVERS. We wait upon your Grace.
                                       Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
  GLOUCESTER. I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
    The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
    I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
    Clarence, who I indeed have cast in darkness,
    I do beweep to many simple gulls;
    Namely, to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham;
    And tell them 'tis the Queen and her allies  
    That stir the King against the Duke my brother.
    Now they believe it, and withal whet me
    To be reveng'd on Rivers, Dorset, Grey;
    But then I sigh and, with a piece of Scripture,
    Tell them that God bids us do good for evil.
    And thus I clothe my naked villainy
    With odd old ends stol'n forth of holy writ,
    And seem a saint when most I play the devil.

                       Enter two MURDERERS

    But, soft, here come my executioners.
    How now, my hardy stout resolved mates!
    Are you now going to dispatch this thing?
  FIRST MURDERER. We are, my lord, and come to have the
    warrant,
    That we may be admitted where he is.
  GLOUCESTER. Well thought upon; I have it here about me.
                                             [Gives the warrant]
    When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.  
    But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
    Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;
    For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps
    May move your hearts to pity, if you mark him.
  FIRST MURDERER. Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to
    prate;
    Talkers are no good doers. Be assur'd
    We go to use our hands and not our tongues.
  GLOUCESTER. Your eyes drop millstones when fools' eyes fall
    tears.
    I like you, lads; about your business straight;
    Go, go, dispatch.
  FIRST MURDERER. We will, my noble lord.                 Exeunt




SCENE 4.

London. The Tower

Enter CLARENCE and KEEPER

  KEEPER. Why looks your Grace so heavily to-day?
  CLARENCE. O, I have pass'd a miserable night,
    So full of fearful dreams, of ugly sights,
    That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
    I would not spend another such a night
    Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days-
    So full of dismal terror was the time!
  KEEPER. What was your dream, my lord? I pray you
    tell me.
  CLARENCE. Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower
    And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy;
    And in my company my brother Gloucester,
    Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
    Upon the hatches. Thence we look'd toward England,
    And cited up a thousand heavy times,
    During the wars of York and Lancaster,
    That had befall'n us. As we pac'd along  
    Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
    Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling
    Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard
    Into the tumbling billows of the main.
    O Lord, methought what pain it was to drown,
    What dreadful noise of waters in my ears,
    What sights of ugly death within my eyes!
    Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wrecks,
    A thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon,
    Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
    Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
    All scatt'red in the bottom of the sea;
    Some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes
    Where eyes did once inhabit there were crept,
    As 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems,
    That woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep
    And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatt'red by.
  KEEPER. Had you such leisure in the time of death
    To gaze upon these secrets of the deep?
  CLARENCE. Methought I had; and often did I strive  
    To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood
    Stopp'd in my soul and would not let it forth
    To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air;
    But smother'd it within my panting bulk,
    Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
  KEEPER. Awak'd you not in this sore agony?
  CLARENCE. No, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life.
    O, then began the tempest to my soul!
    I pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood
    With that sour ferryman which poets write of,
    Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
    The first that there did greet my stranger soul
    Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick,
    Who spake aloud 'What scourge for perjury
    Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?'
    And so he vanish'd. Then came wand'ring by
    A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
    Dabbled in blood, and he shriek'd out aloud
    'Clarence is come-false, fleeting, perjur'd Clarence,
    That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury.  
    Seize on him, Furies, take him unto torment!'
    With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
    Environ'd me, and howled in mine ears
    Such hideous cries that, with the very noise,
    I trembling wak'd, and for a season after
    Could not believe but that I was in hell,
    Such terrible impression made my dream.
  KEEPER. No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you;
    I am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.
  CLARENCE. Ah, Keeper, Keeper, I have done these things
    That now give evidence against my soul
    For Edward's sake, and see how he requites me!
    O God! If my deep prayers cannot appease Thee,
    But Thou wilt be aveng'd on my misdeeds,
    Yet execute Thy wrath in me alone;
    O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
  KEEPER, I prithee sit by me awhile;
    My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
  KEEPER. I will, my lord. God give your Grace good rest.
                                               [CLARENCE sleeps]  

                  Enter BRAKENBURY the Lieutenant

  BRAKENBURY. Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
    Makes the night morning and the noontide night.
    Princes have but their titles for their glories,
    An outward honour for an inward toil;
    And for unfelt imaginations
    They often feel a world of restless cares,
    So that between their tides and low name
    There's nothing differs but the outward fame.

                      Enter the two MURDERERS

  FIRST MURDERER. Ho! who's here?
  BRAKENBURY. What wouldst thou, fellow, and how cam'st
    thou hither?
  FIRST MURDERER. I would speak with Clarence, and I came
    hither on my legs.
  BRAKENBURY. What, so brief?  
  SECOND MURDERER. 'Tis better, sir, than to be tedious. Let
    him see our commission and talk no more.
                                           [BRAKENBURY reads it]
  BRAKENBURY. I am, in this, commanded to deliver
    The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands.
    I will not reason what is meant hereby,
    Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.
    There lies the Duke asleep; and there the keys.
    I'll to the King and signify to him
    That thus I have resign'd to you my charge.
  FIRST MURDERER. You may, sir; 'tis a point of wisdom. Fare
    you well.                       Exeunt BRAKENBURY and KEEPER
  SECOND MURDERER. What, shall I stab him as he sleeps?
  FIRST MURDERER. No; he'll say 'twas done cowardly, when
    he wakes.
  SECOND MURDERER. Why, he shall never wake until the great
    judgment-day.
  FIRST MURDERER. Why, then he'll say we stabb'd him
    sleeping.
  SECOND MURDERER. The urging of that word judgment hath  
    bred a kind of remorse in me.
  FIRST MURDERER. What, art thou afraid?
  SECOND MURDERER. Not to kill him, having a warrant; but to
    be damn'd for killing him, from the which no warrant can
    defend me.
  FIRST MURDERER. I thought thou hadst been resolute.
  SECOND MURDERER. So I am, to let him live.
  FIRST MURDERER. I'll back to the Duke of Gloucester and
    tell him so.
  SECOND MURDERER. Nay, I prithee, stay a little. I hope this
    passionate humour of mine will change; it was wont to
    hold me but while one tells twenty.
  FIRST MURDERER. How dost thou feel thyself now?
    SECOND MURDERER. Faith, some certain dregs of conscience
    are yet within me.
  FIRST MURDERER. Remember our reward, when the deed's
    done.
  SECOND MURDERER. Zounds, he dies; I had forgot the reward.
  FIRST MURDERER. Where's thy conscience now?
  SECOND MURDERER. O, in the Duke of Gloucester's purse!  
  FIRST MURDERER. When he opens his purse to give us our
    reward, thy conscience flies out.
  SECOND MURDERER. 'Tis no matter; let it go; there's few or
    none will entertain it.
  FIRST MURDERER. What if it come to thee again?
  SECOND MURDERER. I'll not meddle with it-it makes a man
    coward: a man cannot steal, but it accuseth him; a man
    cannot swear, but it checks him; a man cannot lie with his
    neighbour's wife, but it detects him. 'Tis a blushing shame-
    fac'd spirit that mutinies in a man's bosom; it fills a man
    full of obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold
    that-by chance I found. It beggars any man that keeps it.
    It is turn'd out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing;
    and every man that means to live well endeavours to trust
    to himself and live without it.
  FIRST MURDERER. Zounds, 'tis even now at my elbow,
    persuading me not to kill the Duke.
  SECOND MURDERER. Take the devil in thy mind and believe
    him not; he would insinuate with thee but to make the
    sigh.  
  FIRST MURDERER. I am strong-fram'd; he cannot prevail with
    me.
  SECOND MURDERER. Spoke like a tall man that respects thy
    reputation. Come, shall we fall to work?
  FIRST MURDERER. Take him on the costard with the hilts of
    thy sword, and then chop him in the malmsey-butt in the
    next room.
  SECOND MURDERER. O excellent device! and make a sop of
    him.
  FIRST MURDERER. Soft! he wakes.
  SECOND MURDERER. Strike!
  FIRST MURDERER. No, we'll reason with him.
  CLARENCE. Where art thou, Keeper? Give me a cup of wine.
  SECOND MURDERER. You shall have wine enough, my lord,
    anon.
  CLARENCE. In God's name, what art thou?
  FIRST MURDERER. A man, as you are.
  CLARENCE. But not as I am, royal.
  SECOND MURDERER. Nor you as we are, loyal.
  CLARENCE. Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.  
  FIRST MURDERER. My voice is now the King's, my looks
    mine own.
  CLARENCE. How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
    Your eyes do menace me. Why look you pale?
    Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
  SECOND MURDERER. To, to, to-
  CLARENCE. To murder me?
  BOTH MURDERERS. Ay, ay.
  CLARENCE. You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
    And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
    Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
  FIRST MURDERER. Offended us you have not, but the King.
  CLARENCE. I shall be reconcil'd to him again.
  SECOND MURDERER. Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.
  CLARENCE. Are you drawn forth among a world of men
    To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
    Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?
    What lawful quest have given their verdict up
    Unto the frowning judge, or who pronounc'd
    The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death?  
    Before I be convict by course of law,
    To threaten me with death is most unlawful.
    I charge you, as you hope to have redemption
    By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
    That you depart and lay no hands on me.
    The deed you undertake is damnable.
  FIRST MURDERER. What we will do, we do upon command.
  SECOND MURDERER. And he that hath commanded is our
    King.
  CLARENCE. Erroneous vassals! the great King of kings
    Hath in the tables of his law commanded
    That thou shalt do no murder. Will you then
    Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's?
    Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hand
    To hurl upon their heads that break his law.
  SECOND MURDERER. And that same vengeance doth he hurl
    on thee
    For false forswearing, and for murder too;
    Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight
    In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.  
  FIRST MURDERER. And like a traitor to the name of God
    Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade
    Unripp'dst the bowels of thy sov'reign's son.
  SECOND MURDERER. Whom thou wast sworn to cherish and
    defend.
  FIRST MURDERER. How canst thou urge God's dreadful law
    to us,
    When thou hast broke it in such dear degree?
  CLARENCE. Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
    For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.
    He sends you not to murder me for this,
    For in that sin he is as deep as I.
    If God will be avenged for the deed,
    O, know you yet He doth it publicly.
    Take not the quarrel from His pow'rful arm;
    He needs no indirect or lawless course
    To cut off those that have offended Him.
  FIRST MURDERER. Who made thee then a bloody minister
    When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,
    That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?  
  CLARENCE. My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.
  FIRST MURDERER. Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy
    faults,
    Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
  CLARENCE. If you do love my brother, hate not me;
    I am his brother, and I love him well.
    If you are hir'd for meed, go back again,
    And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
    Who shall reward you better for my life
    Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
  SECOND MURDERER. You are deceiv'd: your brother Gloucester
    hates you.
  CLARENCE. O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear.
    Go you to him from me.
  FIRST MURDERER. Ay, so we will.
  CLARENCE. Tell him when that our princely father York
    Bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm
    And charg'd us from his soul to love each other,
    He little thought of this divided friendship.
    Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.  
  FIRST MURDERER. Ay, millstones; as he lesson'd us to weep.
  CLARENCE. O, do not slander him, for he is kind.
  FIRST MURDERER. Right, as snow in harvest. Come, you
    deceive yourself:
    'Tis he that sends us to destroy you here.
    CLARENCE. It cannot be; for he bewept my fortune
    And hugg'd me in his arms, and swore with sobs
    That he would labour my delivery.
  FIRST MURDERER. Why, so he doth, when he delivers you
    From this earth's thraldom to the joys of heaven.
  SECOND MURDERER. Make peace with God, for you must die,
    my lord.
  CLARENCE. Have you that holy feeling in your souls
    To counsel me to make my peace with God,
    And are you yet to your own souls so blind
    That you will war with God by murd'ring me?
    O, sirs, consider: they that set you on
    To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
  SECOND MURDERER. What shall we do?
  CLARENCE. Relent, and save your souls.  
  FIRST MURDERER. Relent! No, 'tis cowardly and womanish.
  CLARENCE. Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
    Which of you, if you were a prince's son,
    Being pent from liberty as I am now,
    If two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
    Would not entreat for life?
    My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks;
    O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
    Come thou on my side and entreat for me-
    As you would beg were you in my distress.
    A begging prince what beggar pities not?
  SECOND MURDERER. Look behind you, my lord.
  FIRST MURDERER.  [Stabbing him]  Take that, and that. If all
    this will not do,
    I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.
                                              Exit with the body
  SECOND MURDERER. A bloody deed, and desperately
    dispatch'd!
    How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
    Of this most grievous murder!  

                       Re-enter FIRST MURDERER

  FIRST MURDERER-How now, what mean'st thou that thou
    help'st me not?
    By heavens, the Duke shall know how slack you have
    been!
  SECOND MURDERER. I would he knew that I had sav'd his
    brother!
    Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say;
    For I repent me that the Duke is slain.                 Exit
  FIRST MURDERER. So do not I. Go, coward as thou art.
    Well, I'll go hide the body in some hole,
    Till that the Duke give order for his burial;
    And when I have my meed, I will away;
    For this will out, and then I must not stay.            Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE 1.

London. The palace

Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD sick, QUEEN ELIZABETH, DORSET, RIVERS,
HASTINGS, BUCKINGHAM, GREY, and others

  KING EDWARD. Why, so. Now have I done a good day's
    work.
    You peers, continue this united league.
    I every day expect an embassage
    From my Redeemer to redeem me hence;
    And more at peace my soul shall part to heaven,
    Since I have made my friends at peace on earth.
    Hastings and Rivers, take each other's hand;
    Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love.
  RIVERS. By heaven, my soul is purg'd from grudging hate;
    And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.
  HASTINGS. So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!
  KING EDWARD. Take heed you dally not before your king;
    Lest He that is the supreme King of kings
    Confound your hidden falsehood and award  
    Either of you to be the other's end.
  HASTINGS. So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!
  RIVERS. And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!
  KING EDWARD. Madam, yourself is not exempt from this;
    Nor you, son Dorset; Buckingham, nor you:
    You have been factious one against the other.
    Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand;
    And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. There, Hastings; I will never more
    remember
    Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine!
  KING EDWARD. Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love Lord
    Marquis.
  DORSET. This interchange of love, I here protest,
    Upon my part shall be inviolable.
  HASTINGS. And so swear I.                       [They embrace]
  KING EDWARD. Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this
    league
    With thy embracements to my wife's allies,
    And make me happy in your unity.  
  BUCKINGHAM.  [To the QUEEN]  Whenever Buckingham
    doth turn his hate
    Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love
    Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
    With hate in those where I expect most love!
    When I have most need to employ a friend
    And most assured that he is a friend,
    Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
    Be he unto me! This do I beg of God
    When I am cold in love to you or yours.
                                                  [They embrace]
  KING EDWARD. A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
    Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
    There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here
    To make the blessed period of this peace.
  BUCKINGHAM. And, in good time,
    Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliff and the Duke.

                      Enter GLOUCESTER, and RATCLIFF
  
  GLOUCESTER. Good morrow to my sovereign king and
    Queen;
    And, princely peers, a happy time of day!
  KING EDWARD. Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.
    Gloucester, we have done deeds of charity,
    Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,
    Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.
  GLOUCESTER. A blessed labour, my most sovereign lord.
    Among this princely heap, if any here,
    By false intelligence or wrong surmise,
    Hold me a foe-
    If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
    Have aught committed that is hardly borne
    To any in this presence, I desire
    To reconcile me to his friendly peace:
    'Tis death to me to be at enmity;
    I hate it, and desire all good men's love.
    First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
    Which I will purchase with my duteous service;
    Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,  
    If ever any grudge were lodg'd between us;
    Of you, and you, Lord Rivers, and of Dorset,
    That all without desert have frown'd on me;
    Of you, Lord Woodville, and, Lord Scales, of you;
    Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen-indeed, of all.
    I do not know that Englishman alive
    With whom my soul is any jot at odds
    More than the infant that is born to-night.
    I thank my God for my humility.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. A holy day shall this be kept hereafter.
    I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
    My sovereign lord, I do beseech your Highness
    To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
  GLOUCESTER. Why, madam, have I off'red love for this,
    To be so flouted in this royal presence?
    Who knows not that the gentle Duke is dead?
                                                [They all start]
    You do him injury to scorn his corse.
  KING EDWARD. Who knows not he is dead! Who knows
    he is?  
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
  BUCKINGHAM. Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
  DORSET. Ay, my good lord; and no man in the presence
    But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.
  KING EDWARD. Is Clarence dead? The order was revers'd.
  GLOUCESTER. But he, poor man, by your first order died,
    And that a winged Mercury did bear;
    Some tardy cripple bare the countermand
    That came too lag to see him buried.
    God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
    Nearer in bloody thoughts, an not in blood,
    Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,
    And yet go current from suspicion!

                           Enter DERBY

  DERBY. A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!
  KING EDWARD. I prithee, peace; my soul is full of sorrow.
  DERBY. I Will not rise unless your Highness hear me.
  KING EDWARD. Then say at once what is it thou requests.  
  DERBY. The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life;
    Who slew to-day a riotous gentleman
    Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
  KING EDWARD. Have I a tongue to doom my brother's death,
    And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave?
    My brother killed no man-his fault was thought,
    And yet his punishment was bitter death.
    Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath,
    Kneel'd at my feet, and bid me be advis'd?
    Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love?
    Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
    The mighty Warwick and did fight for me?
    Who told me, in the field at Tewksbury
    When Oxford had me down, he rescued me
    And said 'Dear Brother, live, and be a king'?
    Who told me, when we both lay in the field
    Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
    Even in his garments, and did give himself,
    All thin and naked, to the numb cold night?
    All this from my remembrance brutish wrath  
    Sinfully pluck'd, and not a man of you
    Had so much race to put it in my mind.
    But when your carters or your waiting-vassals
    Have done a drunken slaughter and defac'd
    The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
    You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon;
    And I, unjustly too, must grant it you.        [DERBY rises]
    But for my brother not a man would speak;
    Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
    For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all
    Have been beholding to him in his life;
    Yet none of you would once beg for his life.
    O God, I fear thy justice will take hold
    On me, and you, and mine, and yours, for this!
    Come, Hastings, help me to my closet. Ah, poor Clarence!
                                 Exeunt some with KING and QUEEN
  GLOUCESTER. This is the fruits of rashness. Mark'd you not
    How that the guilty kindred of the Queen
    Look'd pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?
    O, they did urge it still unto the King!  
    God will revenge it. Come, lords, will you go
    To comfort Edward with our company?
  BUCKINGHAM. We wait upon your Grace.                    Exeunt




SCENE 2.

London. The palace

Enter the old DUCHESS OF YORK, with the SON and DAUGHTER of CLARENCE

  SON. Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?
  DUCHESS. No, boy.
  DAUGHTER. Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast,
    And cry 'O Clarence, my unhappy son!'?
  SON. Why do you look on us, and shake your head,
    And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,
    If that our noble father were alive?
  DUCHESS. My pretty cousins, you mistake me both;
    I do lament the sickness of the King,
    As loath to lose him, not your father's death;
    It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.
  SON. Then you conclude, my grandam, he is dead.
    The King mine uncle is to blame for it.
    God will revenge it; whom I will importune
    With earnest prayers all to that effect.
  DAUGHTER. And so will I.  
  DUCHESS. Peace, children, peace! The King doth love you
    well.
    Incapable and shallow innocents,
    You cannot guess who caus'd your father's death.
  SON. Grandam, we can; for my good uncle Gloucester
    Told me the King, provok'd to it by the Queen,
    Devis'd impeachments to imprison him.
    And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
    And pitied me, and kindly kiss'd my cheek;
    Bade me rely on him as on my father,
    And he would love me dearly as a child.
  DUCHESS. Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape,
    And with a virtuous vizor hide deep vice!
    He is my son; ay, and therein my shame;
    Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
  SON. Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
  DUCHESS. Ay, boy.
  SON. I cannot think it. Hark! what noise is this?

            Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH, with her hair about her  
                ears; RIVERS and DORSET after her

  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and
    weep,
    To chide my fortune, and torment myself?
    I'll join with black despair against my soul
    And to myself become an enemy.
  DUCHESS. What means this scene of rude impatience?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. To make an act of tragic violence.
  EDWARD, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead.
    Why grow the branches when the root is gone?
    Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
    If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,
    That our swift-winged souls may catch the King's,
    Or like obedient subjects follow him
    To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
  DUCHESS. Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow
    As I had title in thy noble husband!
    I have bewept a worthy husband's death,
    And liv'd with looking on his images;  
    But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
    Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death,
    And I for comfort have but one false glass,
    That grieves me when I see my shame in him.
    Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother
    And hast the comfort of thy children left;
    But death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms
    And pluck'd two crutches from my feeble hands-
    Clarence and Edward. O, what cause have I-
    Thine being but a moiety of my moan-
    To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries?
  SON. Ah, aunt, you wept not for our father's death!
    How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
  DAUGHTER. Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd;
    Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Give me no help in lamentation;
    I am not barren to bring forth complaints.
    All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes
    That I, being govern'd by the watery moon,
    May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world!  
    Ah for my husband, for my dear Lord Edward!
  CHILDREN. Ah for our father, for our dear Lord Clarence!
  DUCHESS. Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. What stay had I but Edward? and he's
    gone.
  CHILDREN. What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.
  DUCHESS. What stays had I but they? and they are gone.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Was never widow had so dear a loss.
  CHILDREN. Were never orphans had so dear a loss.
  DUCHESS. Was never mother had so dear a loss.
    Alas, I am the mother of these griefs!
    Their woes are parcell'd, mine is general.
    She for an Edward weeps, and so do I:
    I for a Clarence weep, so doth not she.
    These babes for Clarence weep, and so do I:
    I for an Edward weep, so do not they.
    Alas, you three on me, threefold distress'd,
    Pour all your tears! I am your sorrow's nurse,
    And I will pamper it with lamentation.
  DORSET. Comfort, dear mother. God is much displeas'd  
    That you take with unthankfulness his doing.
    In common worldly things 'tis called ungrateful
    With dull unwillingness to repay a debt
    Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
    Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
    For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
  RIVERS. Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
    Of the young prince your son. Send straight for him;
    Let him be crown'd; in him your comfort lives.
    Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave,
    And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.

               Enter GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM, DERBY,
                      HASTINGS, and RATCLIFF

  GLOUCESTER. Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause
    To wail the dimming of our shining star;
    But none can help our harms by wailing them.
    Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;
    I did not see your Grace. Humbly on my knee  
    I crave your blessing.
  DUCHESS. God bless thee; and put meekness in thy breast,
    Love, charity, obedience, and true duty!
  GLOUCESTER. Amen!  [Aside]  And make me die a good old
    man!
    That is the butt end of a mother's blessing;
    I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.
  BUCKINGHAM. You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing
    peers,
    That bear this heavy mutual load of moan,
    Now cheer each other in each other's love.
    Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
    We are to reap the harvest of his son.
    The broken rancour of your high-swol'n hearts,
    But lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together,
    Must gently be preserv'd, cherish'd, and kept.
    Me seemeth good that, with some little train,
    Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet
    Hither to London, to be crown'd our King.

 RIVERS. Why with some little train, my Lord of  
    Buckingham?
  BUCKINGHAM. Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude
    The new-heal'd wound of malice should break out,
    Which would be so much the more dangerous
    By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd;
    Where every horse bears his commanding rein
    And may direct his course as please himself,
    As well the fear of harm as harm apparent,
    In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
  GLOUCESTER. I hope the King made peace with all of us;
    And the compact is firm and true in me.
  RIVERS. And so in me; and so, I think, in an.
    Yet, since it is but green, it should be put
    To no apparent likelihood of breach,
    Which haply by much company might be urg'd;
    Therefore I say with noble Buckingham
    That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince.
  HASTINGS. And so say I.
  GLOUCESTER. Then be it so; and go we to determine
    Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.  
    Madam, and you, my sister, will you go
    To give your censures in this business?
                        Exeunt all but BUCKINGHAM and GLOUCESTER
  BUCKINGHAM. My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
    For God sake, let not us two stay at home;
    For by the way I'll sort occasion,
    As index to the story we late talk'd of,
    To part the Queen's proud kindred from the Prince.
  GLOUCESTER. My other self, my counsel's consistory,
    My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin,
    I, as a child, will go by thy direction.
    Toward Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.        Exeunt




SCENE 3.

London. A street

Enter one CITIZEN at one door, and another at the other

  FIRST CITIZEN. Good morrow, neighbour. Whither away so
    fast?
  SECOND CITIZEN. I promise you, I scarcely know myself.
    Hear you the news abroad?
  FIRST CITIZEN. Yes, that the King is dead.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Ill news, by'r lady; seldom comes the
    better.
    I fear, I fear 'twill prove a giddy world.

                        Enter another CITIZEN

  THIRD CITIZEN. Neighbours, God speed!
  FIRST CITIZEN. Give you good morrow, sir.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Doth the news hold of good King Edward's
    death?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Ay, sir, it is too true; God help the while!  
  THIRD CITIZEN. Then, masters, look to see a troublous
    world.
  FIRST CITIZEN. No, no; by God's good grace, his son shall
    reign.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Woe to that land that's govern'd by a child.
  SECOND CITIZEN. In him there is a hope of government,
    Which, in his nonage, council under him,
    And, in his full and ripened years, himself,
    No doubt, shall then, and till then, govern well.
  FIRST CITIZEN. So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
    Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Stood the state so? No, no, good friends,
    God wot;
    For then this land was famously enrich'd
    With politic grave counsel; then the King
    Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Why, so hath this, both by his father and
    mother.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Better it were they all came by his father,
    Or by his father there were none at all;  
    For emulation who shall now be nearest
    Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.
    O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester!
    And the Queen's sons and brothers haught and proud;
    And were they to be rul'd, and not to rule,
    This sickly land might solace as before.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Come, come, we fear the worst; all will be
    well.
  THIRD CITIZEN. When clouds are seen, wise men put on
    their cloaks;
    When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;
    When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
    Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.
    All may be well; but, if God sort it so,
    'Tis more than we deserve or I expect.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Truly, the hearts of men are fun of fear.
    You cannot reason almost with a man
    That looks not heavily and fun of dread.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Before the days of change, still is it so;
    By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust  
    Ensuing danger; as by proof we see
    The water swell before a boist'rous storm.
    But leave it all to God. Whither away?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
  THIRD CITIZEN. And so was I; I'll bear you company.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 4.

London. The palace

Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, the young DUKE OF YORK, QUEEN ELIZABETH,
and the DUCHESS OF YORK

  ARCHBISHOP. Last night, I hear, they lay at Stony Stratford,
    And at Northampton they do rest to-night;
    To-morrow or next day they will be here.
  DUCHESS. I long with all my heart to see the Prince.
    I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. But I hear no; they say my son of York
    Has almost overta'en him in his growth.
  YORK. Ay, mother; but I would not have it so.
  DUCHESS. Why, my good cousin, it is good to grow.
  YORK. Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,
    My uncle Rivers talk'd how I did grow
    More than my brother. 'Ay,' quoth my uncle Gloucester
    'Small herbs have grace: great weeds do grow apace.'
    And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast,
    Because sweet flow'rs are slow and weeds make haste.  
  DUCHESS. Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
    In him that did object the same to thee.
    He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
    So long a-growing and so leisurely
    That, if his rule were true, he should be gracious.
  ARCHBISHOP. And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
  DUCHESS. I hope he is; but yet let mothers doubt.
  YORK. Now, by my troth, if I had been rememb'red,
    I could have given my uncle's Grace a flout
    To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.
  DUCHESS. How, my young York? I prithee let me hear it.
  YORK. Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
    That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old.
    'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
    Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
  DUCHESS. I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?
  YORK. Grandam, his nurse.
  DUCHESS. His nurse! Why she was dead ere thou wast
    born.
  YORK. If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.  
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. A parlous boy! Go to, you are too
    shrewd.
  ARCHBISHOP. Good madam, be not angry with the child.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Pitchers have ears.

                        Enter a MESSENGER

  ARCHBISHOP. Here comes a messenger. What news?
  MESSENGER. Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. How doth the Prince?
  MESSENGER. Well, madam, and in health.
  DUCHESS. What is thy news?
  MESSENGER. Lord Rivers and Lord Grey
    Are sent to Pomfret, and with them
    Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.
  DUCHESS. Who hath committed them?
  MESSENGER. The mighty Dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.
  ARCHBISHOP. For what offence?
  MESSENGER. The sum of all I can, I have disclos'd.
    Why or for what the nobles were committed  
    Is all unknown to me, my gracious lord.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Ay me, I see the ruin of my house!
    The tiger now hath seiz'd the gentle hind;
    Insulting tyranny begins to jet
    Upon the innocent and aweless throne.
    Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre!
    I see, as in a map, the end of all.
  DUCHESS. Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
    How many of you have mine eyes beheld!
    My husband lost his life to get the crown;
    And often up and down my sons were toss'd
    For me to joy and weep their gain and loss;
    And being seated, and domestic broils
    Clean over-blown, themselves the conquerors
    Make war upon themselves-brother to brother,
    Blood to blood, self against self. O, preposterous
    And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen,
    Or let me die, to look on death no more!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. Come, come, my boy; we will to
    sanctuary.  
    Madam, farewell.
  DUCHESS. Stay, I will go with you.
  QUEEN ELIZABETH. You have no cause.
  ARCHBISHOP.  [To the QUEEN]  My gracious lady, go.
    And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
    For my part, I'll resign unto your Grace
    The seal I keep; and so betide to me
    As well I tender you and all of yours!
    Go, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.                Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE 1.

London. A street

The trumpets sound. Enter the PRINCE OF WALES, GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM,
CATESBY, CARDINAL BOURCHIER, and others

  BUCKINGHAM. Welcome, sweet Prince, to London, to your
    chamber.
  GLOUCESTER. Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign.
    The weary way hath made you melancholy.
  PRINCE. No, uncle; but our crosses on the way
    Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.
    I want more uncles here to welcome me.
  GLOUCESTER. Sweet Prince, the untainted virtue of your
    years
    Hath not yet div'd into the world's deceit;
    Nor more can you distinguish of a man
    Than of his outward show; which, God He knows,
    Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
    Those uncles which you want were dangerous;
    Your Grace attended to their sug'red words  
    But look'd not on the poison of their hearts.
    God keep you from them and from such false friends!
  PRINCE. God keep me from false friends! but they were
    none.
  GLOUCESTER. My lord, the Mayor of London comes to greet
    you.

                Enter the LORD MAYOR and his train

  MAYOR. God bless your Grace with health and happy days!
  PRINCE. I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.
    I thought my mother and my brother York
    Would long ere this have met us on the way.
    Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not
    To tell us whether they will come or no!

                        Enter LORD HASTINGS

  BUCKINGHAM. And, in good time, here comes the sweating
    Lord.  
  PRINCE. Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?
  HASTINGS. On what occasion, God He knows, not I,
    The Queen your mother and your brother York
    Have taken sanctuary. The tender Prince
    Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace,
    But by his mother was perforce withheld.
  BUCKINGHAM. Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
    Is this of hers? Lord Cardinal, will your Grace
    Persuade the Queen to send the Duke of York
    Unto his princely brother presently?
    If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him
    And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
  CARDINAL. My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
    Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
    Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
    To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
    We should infringe the holy privilege
    Of blessed sanctuary! Not for all this land
    Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.
  BUCKINGHAM. You are too senseless-obstinate, my lord,  
    Too ceremonious and traditional.
    Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
    You break not sanctuary in seizing him.
    The benefit thereof is always granted
    To those whose dealings have deserv'd the place
    And those who have the wit to claim the place.
    This Prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserv'd it,
    And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.
    Then, taking him from thence that is not there,
    You break no privilege nor charter there.
    Oft have I heard of sanctuary men;
    But sanctuary children never till now.
  CARDINAL. My lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once.
    Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
  HASTINGS. I go, my lord.
  PRINCE. Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
                                    Exeunt CARDINAL and HASTINGS
    Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
    Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
  GLOUCESTER. Where it seems best unto your royal self.  
    If I may counsel you, some day or two
    Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower,
    Then where you please and shall be thought most fit
    For your best health and recreation.
  PRINCE. I do not like the Tower, of any place.
    Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
  BUCKINGHAM. He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,
    Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
  PRINCE. Is it upon record, or else reported
    Successively from age to age, he built it?
  BUCKINGHAM. Upon record, my gracious lord.
  PRINCE. But say, my lord, it were not regist'red,
    Methinks the truth should Eve from age to age,
    As 'twere retail'd to all posterity,
    Even to the general all-ending day.
  GLOUCESTER.  [Aside]  So wise so young, they say, do never
    live long.
  PRINCE. What say you, uncle?
  GLOUCESTER. I say, without characters, fame lives long.
    [Aside]  Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity,  
    I moralize two meanings in one word.
  PRINCE. That Julius Caesar was a famous man;
    With what his valour did enrich his wit,
    His wit set down to make his valour live.
    Death makes no conquest of this conqueror;
    For now he lives in fame, though not in life.
    I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham-
  BUCKINGHAM. What, my gracious lord?
  PRINCE. An if I live until I be a man,
    I'll win our ancient right in France again,
    Or die a soldier as I liv'd a king.
  GLOUCESTER.  [Aside]  Short summers lightly have a forward
    spring.

              Enter HASTINGS, young YORK, and the CARDINAL

  BUCKINGHAM. Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of
    York.
  PRINCE. Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
  YORK. Well, my dread lord; so must I can you now.  
  PRINCE. Ay brother, to our grief, as it is yours.
    Too late he died that might have kept that title,
    Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
  GLOUCESTER. How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?
  YORK. I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,
    You said that idle weeds are fast in growth.
    The Prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
  GLOUCESTER. He hath, my lord.
  YORK. And therefore is he idle?
  GLOUCESTER. O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.
  YORK. Then he is more beholding to you than I.
  GLOUCESTER. He may command me as my sovereign;
    But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
  YORK. I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
  GLOUCESTER. My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart!
  PRINCE. A beggar, brother?
  YORK. Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,
    And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
  GLOUCESTER. A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin.
  YORK. A greater gift! O, that's the sword to it!  
  GLOUCESTER. Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
  YORK. O, then, I see you will part but with light gifts:
    In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.
  GLOUCESTER. It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.
  YORK. I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
  GLOUCESTER. What, would you have my weapon, little
    Lord?
  YORK. I would, that I might thank you as you call me.
  GLOUCESTER. How?
  YORK. Little.
  PRINCE. My Lord of York will still be cross in talk.
    Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.
  YORK. You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.
    Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me;
    Because that I am little, like an ape,
    He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
  BUCKINGHAM. With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
    To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle
    He prettily and aptly taunts himself.
    So cunning and so young is wonderf